EVERYONE, AND WELCOME TO THE
MARCH TWENTY FOUR WORK SESSION
OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL
WHERE WE ARE HERE TO HEAR ABOUT
26 27 BUDGET PLANNING FROM FOR
OUR INDOMITABLE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR MR. HONY, YOU
HAVE THE CON.
>> THANK YOU.
MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL YOU'LL
BE HEARING FROM SIX PEOPLE THIS
EVENING IS REALIZE WE WERE
WILL BE YOUR FIRST SESSION
THROUGH WITH US.
WE DON'T BRING EVERYBODY TO THE
WORK SESSION.
WE BRING JUST A HANDFUL
OF PEOPLE TO GIVE YOU AN IDEA
OF SOME THINGS THAT THEY'RE
LOOKING AT WITHIN THEIR BUDGET
.
>> THIS CAN BE A LITTLE
CONFUSING IN THAT YOU MIGHT
HEAR INFORMATION ABOUT
SOMETHING TONIGHT THAT'S NOT
ACTUALLY IN THE BUDGET BUT WE
DO SHARE INFORMATION WITH YOU
SO THAT YOU GET A FLAVOR FOR
WHAT PEOPLE ARE LOOKING AT,
WHAT NEEDS THERE MIGHT BE, WHAT
HORIZON ISSUES THERE MIGHT BE.
>> THIS IS A LITTLE BIT UNUSUAL
ENVIRONMENT THAT WE'RE IN.
WE ARE TRYING TO HOLD ON TO ALL
OF THE FUNDING THAT WE HAVE FOR
VARIOUS PROJECTS.
WE DON'T KNOW IF WE'LL BE ABLE
TO DO THAT OR NOT.
SO DURING THE COURSE OF THE
FISCAL YEAR WE NORMALLY DON'T
MAKE MANY ADJUSTMENTS.
WE NEED TO BE OPEN MINDED ABOUT
PERHAPS THE NEED TO DO THIS
TIME DEPENDING ON HOW THINGS GO
.
THIS IS NOT YET THE TIME TO
START FIELDING BUDGET QUESTIONS
WHICH YOU'LL GET A LITTLE
INFORMATION ABOUT THAT AS WELL
.
THE TIMELINES BETWEEN US AND
THE STATE ARE NOT EXACTLY
ALIGNED.
SO FOR EXAMPLE WE NORMALLY ARE
IMPACTED BY OUR PORTION
OF STATE SHARED REVENUE.
THE STATE IS CONTEMPLATING
GIVING THE CITIES MORE MONEY
BUT THAT DECISION WILL NOT BE
MADE IN TIME FOR US TO KNOW
ABOUT IT SO WE'LL HAVE TO
ADJUST TO IT SHOULD IT COME
DOWN AT SOME POINT LATER IT'S
FIRST YOU'LL HEAR FROM MARTY
WHO WILL FRAME BOTH THE PROCESS
AND GIVES THEM INFORMATION
ABOUT THE FINANCIAL PICTURE.
NEXT WILL BE MRS. STULTZ
FOLLOWED BY DEREK JENNIFER.
WE'LL TALK ABOUT THE HOUSING
COMMISSION JORDAN ROBERTS WILL
COVER PUBLIC SERVICES AND THEN
ELIAV WILL BE STANDING IN FOR
MONICA THIS EVENING ON A FEW
THINGS.
SO I WILL STOP TALKING AND
MARTY, COME ON UP
.
I NEED TO SHARE THE
PRESENTATION.
JACKIE, THE PRESENTATION IS
THAT LOADED?
OK, HERE WE GO.
THAT'S WHAT GOOD EVENING AS MR.
DE HONY MENTIONED, I'M ALREADY
PACHON I'M THE CITY CFO AND
TONIGHT I'LL BE PRESENTING OUR
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY SIX TWENTY
SEVEN BUDGET PLAN AND FISCAL
OUTLOOK.
WE COVERED THIS PORTION ALREADY
.
THE BUDGET CYCLE INCLUDES A
PROPOSED FISCAL YEAR TWENTY SIX
BUDGET AS WELL AS OUR FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY SEVEN BUDGET PLAN.
I'LL BEGIN BY QUICKLY COVERING
OUR BUDGET CALENDAR WHICH
BEGINS WITH TONIGHT'S
PRESENTATION FOLLOWED BY MR.
DONEES RECOMMENDED BUDGET IN
THE FIRST READING OF ORDINANCE
AMENDMENTS NECESSARY FOR RATE
CHANGES WHICH WILL BE PRESENTED
AT OUR APRIL TWENTY FIRST
REGULARLY SCHEDULED COUNCIL
MEETING NEXT ON MAY 5TH WE'LL
HOLD THE PUBLIC HEARINGS
NECESSARY FOR THE BUDGET AND
THE ORDINANCE AND FEE CHANGES
AS WELL.
CONDUCT THAT SECOND READING ON
THE ORDINANCE CHANGES REQUIRED
FOR RATES LEAVING ONLY THE
BUDGET FOR CONSIDERATION ON THE
EVENING OF MAY 19TH.
IF YOU REMINDERS REGARDING THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE RECOMMENDED
BUDGET ANNUALLY WE ADOPT TWO
TYPES OF BUDGETS AND OPERATING
BUDGET AND A CAPITAL BUDGET THE
CITY ADMINISTRATORS RECOMMENDED
BUDGET INCORPORATES COUNCIL
POLICY STAFF EXPERTIZE AS WELL
AS PUBLIC INPUT A FEW KEY
POLICIES THAT WE ADHERE TO AND
WHEN DEVELOPING THE BUDGET
INCLUDE FUNDING BALANCED
POLICIES WHICH IN THE CASE
OF THE GENERAL FUND TO MAINTAIN
A 15 TO 20 PERCENT FUND BALANCE
PENSION AND RETIREE HEALTH CARE
FUNDING POLICIES WHICH REQUIRES
THE CITY TO BUDGET THE HIRE
OF THE ACTUARIAL REQUIRED
CONTRIBUTION OR THE EXISTING
LEVEL OF FUNDING IN THE CURRENT
YEAR'S BUDGET PLUS WHATEVER WE
ARE ASSUMING GENERAL FUND
INCREASES TO BE OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM POLICIES
OUR CAPITAL REPAIR AND
REPLACEMENT POLICIES THAT WOULD
BE FOR THE GENERAL FUND AS WELL
AS OUR ENTERPRISE FUNDS AND
FINALLY OUR PARKS FAIRNESS
RESOLUTION WHICH REQUIRES A
GENERAL FUND PORTION OF THE
PARKS BUDGET TO BE INCREASED AT
THE SAME RATE AS THE AVERAGE
PERCENTAGE INCREASE OF THE
TOTAL GENERAL FUND BUDGET.
>> WHEN WE GET TO COUNCIL
CONSIDERATION ON THE EVENING
OF MAY 19TH, SEVEN VOTES ARE
REQUIRED TO ADOPT THE BUDGET.
SIX VOTES WILL BE QUIRED TO
AMEND THE RECOMMENDED BUDGET ON
THAT EVENING WHEREAS DURING THE
FISCAL YEAR EIGHT VOTES ARE
REQUIRED TO AMEND THE BUDGET IF
FOR SOME REASON THE BUDGET IS
NOT APPROVED AT THAT MEETING
THE SECOND COUNCIL MEETING IN
MAY, MR. DONEES RECOMMENDED
BUDGET IS CONSIDERED ADOPTED
BUDGETS ARE ADOPTED BY BY FUND
IN TOTAL NOT BY LINE ITEM
EXCEPT FOR THE GENERAL FUND
WHICH IS ADOPTED BY SERVICE
AREA REPRESENTED.
FINALLY, STATE LAW DOES NOT
ALLOW FOR EXPENDITURES
OF MONIES UNLESS BUDGETED THERE
ARE FOR EACH JUNE IN THIS
UPCOMING JUNE YOU'LL SEE A
RESOLUTION BROUGHT FORWARD FOR
BUDGET AMENDMENTS TO A BOOK TO
AVOID FORECASTED BUDGET
OVERRUNS.
I'LL NOW SHIFT TO SOME
BACKGROUND INFORMATION WHICH
INCLUDES INFORMATION REGARDING
THE ASSUMPTIONS THAT WILL BE
REFLECTED IN THE FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY SIX PROPOSED BUDGET DUE
TO OUR FINANCIAL POLICIES AND
OUR COMMITMENT TO THEM, THE
CITY IS CURRENTLY IN GOOD
FINANCIAL POSITION.
OUR AUDITS ARE CLEAN AND OUR
BOND RATINGS ARE STRONG
PARTICULARLY IN THE GENERAL
OBLIGATION CATEGORY.
WE ARE ONE OF LESS WE ARE ONE
OF LESS THAN 10 COMMUNITY IN
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN WITH A
AAA BOND RATING.
RATINGS OF THIS NATURE ALLOW US
TO RECEIVE BENEFICIAL RATE DEBT
ISSUANCE WHICH IN TURN ALLOWS
US TO ACCOMPLISH MORE THAN WE
WOULD WITHOUT IT WE DEMONSTRATE
FISCAL CONTROL BY BALANCING A
RECURRING REVENUES AND
EXPENDITURES AND MAINTAIN OUR
FUND BALANCE WITHIN POLICY
REQUIREMENTS.
IN ADDITION, OUR PENSION AND
RETIREE HEALTH PLANS ARE WELL
FUNDED DUE TO OUR FUNDING
POLICIES AND THE EXPERTIZE
PROVIDED BY OUR RETIREMENT
SYSTEMS BOARD.
KEEP IN MIND THE FUNDING RATIO
IS REPRESENTED HERE ARE AS
OF JUNE 30TH AND DO NOT INCLUDE
CURRENT MARKET CHANGES.
WE BEGIN THE BUDGET PROCESS BY
MAKING SOME FINANCIAL
ASSUMPTIONS AND FORECAST THOSE
ASSUMPTIONS ARE BASED ON
HISTORICAL DATA TRENDS AS WELL
AS CURRENT INFORMATION.
AS I'M CERTAIN YOU'RE ALL AWARE
WE ARE CURRENTLY EXPERIENCE
SOME ECONOMIC VOLATILITY WHICH
DOESN'T IMPACT OUR FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY SIX ASSUMPTIONS IT
NORMALLY WILL LAG BEFORE IT
HITS THE CITY FINANCIALS.
THEREFORE THE CURRENT ECONOMICS
DON'T REFLECT ANY IMPACTS.
BUT ONCE WE GET PAST FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY SEVEN WE ARE
CONSERVATIVE IN OUR FORECAST
THAT BEING SAID WE ANNUALLY
REVISIT THE ASSUMPTIONS AND
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO ADJUST
THEM ACCORDINGLY.
>> THE MAJOR REVENUE
ASSUMPTIONS WE MOVE FORWARD
WITH IN THIS CYCLE ARE A ALMOST
SIX PERCENT INCREASE IN
PROPERTY TAX IN REAL PERSONAL
PROPERTY TAXES WHICH EQUATES TO
ABOUT FIVE MILLION DOLLAR
INCREASE IN TAX REVENUE.
THIS INCREASE INCLUDES BOTH
ADDITIONS AND SUBTRACTIONS TO
THE TAX BASE.
WE'LL TALK A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT THAT IN AN UPCOMING SIDE.
ALSO INCLUDED IS, AS MR. TONY
MENTIONED, SOME INCREASE IN
STATE SHARE REVENUE ONE PERCENT
OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL SIDE,
FOUR PERCENT IN STATUTORY IF WE
ARE LUCKY ENOUGH TO RECEIVE
ADDITIONAL REVENUES IN THOSE
CATEGORIES, WE CAN REFLECT
THOSE CHANGES IN THE UPCOMING
CYCLE FOR PARKING WE CONTINUE
TO REBOUND AND WE ARE
ANTICIPATING A HEALTHY INCREASE
IN BOTH FISCAL YEAR TWENTY SIX
AND TWENTY SEVEN OF FOURTEEN
AND SEVEN PERCENT RESPECTIVELY
.
TAKING A CLOSER LOOK AT THE TAX
LEVY HISTORY, THE GRAPH
INDICATES THE RESULT
OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND
CURRENT DEVELOPMENT POLICY.
WE CONTINUE TO SEE AN INCREASE
OF TAX REVENUE WHICH IS A
DIRECT RESULT OF INCREASE
OF TAXABLE VALUE.
A LEGEND ON THE LEFT REPRESENTS
A TAX REVENUE WHICH INDICATES
THE APPROXIMATE FIVE MILLION
DOLLAR REVENUE INCREASE THAT I
MENTIONED AND THE BLUE LINE
REPRESENTS THE GRAPH REPRESENTS
THE INCREASE IN TAXABLE VALUE
SO YOU CAN SEE THAT WE ARE
PROJECTING SEVEN PERCENT
INCREASE IN TAXABLE VALUE ON
THE EXPENSE SIDE WE'RE
ANTICIPATING A SIX POINT FOUR
PERCENT INCREASE IN PERSONNEL
COSTS WHICH IS MOSTLY
ATTRIBUTABLE TO WAGES A
FOURTEEN POINT TWO PERCENT
INCREASE IN FLEET COSTS AND
THOSE ARE DIRECTLY AS A RESULT
OF INCREASED VEHICLE AND
EQUIPMENT COSTS AS WELL AS COST
OF ELECTRIFYING OUR FLEET OR
POSSIBLE.
IN ADDITION, WE ARE SEEING A
FIVE PERCENT IN FIVE POINT
EIGHT PERCENT INCREASE IN COSTS
WHICH ARE ASSOCIATED WITH AN
INCREASE IN NEED AS WELL AS THE
COST OF THAT TECHNOLOGY WHEN
ALL THOSE ASSUMPTIONS ALONG
WITH SERVICE AREA BUDGET
REQUESTS COME TOGETHER, WE ARE
PROJECTING THE GENERAL FUND TO
HAVE RECURRING REVENUES
EXCEEDING RECURRENT
EXPENDITURES IN BOTH FISCAL
YEAR 2006 AND TWENTY SEVEN.
YOU'LL NOTICE THAT THE MARGIN
BETWEEN RECURRING REVENUES AND
EXPENSES GETS SMALLER BY FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY SEVEN WHEN WE MOVE
OUT TO FISCAL YEAR TWENTY EIGHT
AND BEYOND WE ARE PROJECTING
THAT SITUATION TO BE IN A
NEGATIVE.
IN ADDITION YOU'LL SEE IN THE
CENTER OF THE SLIDE SOME
INTENDED USE OF FUND BALANCE
FOR ONE TIME PROJECTS AND
INITIATIVES WHILE STILL
REMAINING WITHIN OUR POLICY
RANGE OF 15 TO 20 PERCENT
OF FUND BALANCE.
>> I'M NOT GOING TO SWITCH JUST
AS SOME ASK OF THE FINANCE
DEPARTMENT IN THE UPCOMING
CYCLE OR SOME HORIZON ISSUES.
THE TWO NEEDS THAT WE'RE
REQUESTING AS PART OF THIS
PROJECT IS NUMBER ONE AN FTE
FOR A DEPUTY CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER WHICH CLEARLY WOULD PUT
A NUMBER TWO IN CHARGE
OF FINANCE AND IT ALSO REFLECTS
IN A GROWING NEED OF SUPPORT.
WE HAVE SEVERAL LARGE SCALE
PROJECTS THAT ARE COMING UP
INCLUDING THE SIU YOU STAND UP
AND INCREASED ENVIRONMENTAL
DEVELOPMENT WHICH REQUIRES THE
ATTENTION OF THE CFO OR DEPUTY
.
SECONDLY AND MAYBE EVEN MORE
IMPORTANTLY TO THAT IS
CONTRACTED PAYROLL BACKUP.
WE CURRENTLY HAVE A SINGLE
POINT OF FAILURE WITH OUR
PAYROLL PROCESS.
THEREFORE WE'RE ASKING FOR AN
ADDITIONAL FORTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS TO PROVIDE CONTRACTED
PAYROLL BACK UP TO THIS POINT
WE HAVE A VERY DEDICATED
PAYROLL SUPERVISOR WHO HAS NOT
FAILED US TO DATE BUT WE ARE IN
A VULNERABLE POSITION AS FAR AS
PROCESSING PAYROLL IN THIS WILL
ALLOW US TO FIX THAT SITUATION
.
>> FINALLY, THE LAST THING FOR
ME THIS EVENING TO DISCUSS IS
THE PROPOSED INCREASE
OF UTILITY RATES.
AS I MENTIONED EARLIER ON APRIL
TWENTY FIRST THE FIRST READING
IN THE AUDIT CHANGES RELATED TO
UTILITY RATE CHANGES WILL TAKE
PLACE PLACE.
WE WILL BE REQUESTING A SIX
PERCENT INCREASE IN WATER RATE
REVENUE AND A THREE PERCENT IN
BOTH THE SEWER AND STORM WATER
RATES.
DETAILS SURROUNDING THOSE
REQUIRED ADJUSTMENTS WILL BE
PRESENTED AS THOSE RATES ARE
BROUGHT FORWARD FOR
CONSIDERATION.
THAT CONCLUDES MY REMARKS FOR
THIS EVENING.
UNLESS THERE'S ANY QUESTIONS I
CAN ANSWER.
SURE.
THANK YOU FOR THAT.
I JUST KNOW SINCE 9/11 YOU HAD
NON-RECURRING ITEMS.
COULD YOU DESCRIBE WHAT THOSE
ARE THE NON-RECURRING REVENUE
AND EXPENSES SO THOSE WILL BE
FOR ONE TIME EXPENSES.
MOST OF THEM ARE DUE TO CAPITAL
SO MOST OF THAT CONSIST OF SOME
REPAIRS THAT YOU'LL HEAR JORDAN
SPEAK ABOUT A LITTLE BIT LATER
.
>> MOST OF THOSE ARE RELATED TO
ONETIME CAPITAL PROJECTS.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT BACK THERE'S NOTHING
ELSE.
I'LL HAND IT OFF TO DR. SALTZ.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH, MARTY.
THANKS
, ADMINISTRATOR TONY
MAYOR TAYLOR AND COUNCIL
MEMBERS FOR THE OPPORTUNITY TO
BE HERE TONIGHT.
WE ARE GOING TO GO ON A LITTLE
ADVENTURE.
I WAS ASKED TO TALK ABOUT FOUR
SPECIFIC THINGS SO I WANT TO
GIVE YOU A SENSE OF THE FUNDING
LANDSCAPE.
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT THIS IN MANY
DIFFERENT WAYS BUT WHAT DOES IT
LOOK LIKE STATE FEDERALLY AS WE
LOOK AT CLIMATE AND EQUITY WORK
BROADLY THEN I WANTED TO SHARE
A LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT OUR
ASSETS WERE AS WE LOOK AT THE
BUDGET CYCLE, HOW THE EU IS
GOING JUST IT'S A GREAT TIME TO
KIND OF GIVE AN UPDATE ON WHERE
WE STAND AND WHAT'S COMING
FORWARD AND THEN THE HORIZON
ISSUES THAT WE FACE.
>> SO WITHOUT FURTHER ADO,
LET'S GO.
YOU MAY HAVE SEEN THIS BEFORE.
THIS IS A TABLE I KNOW IT'S
REALLY HARD TO READ BUT I WANT
TO SHARE WITH YOU ALL GLASS
HALF FULL GLASS HALF EMPTY
STORY ON A GLASS HALF FULL
STORY IN THE LAST EIGHTEEN TO
TWENTY FOUR MONTHS OCI HAS BEEN
ABLE TO RAISE THIRTY TWO
MILLION DOLLARS LEVERAGING
THINGS LIKE THE COMMUNITY
CLIMATE ACTION MILLAGE, THE
EXPERTIZE OF STAFF, OUR
COMMUNITY AND THE INPUT THAT
WE'VE RECEIVED FROM THEM.
>> SO THESE ARE THE GRANTS THAT
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO SECURE GREAT
NEWS THAT'S PRETTY
EXTRAORDINARY.
ON THE OTHER SIDE THE GLASS
HALF EMPTY WE HAVE THIRTY TWO
MILLION DOLLARS AT RISK RIGHT
NOW BECAUSE OF CHANGES IN THE
LANDSCAPE.
SO BROADLY SPEAKING I WANTED TO
GIVE YOU AN OVERVIEW OF WHERE
THINGS STAND OUR PHILOSOPHICAL
APPROACH WORKING WITH THE
ATTORNEYS OFFICE AND OF COURSE
ADMINISTRATOR TO HONY IS MOST
OF THESE ARE SIGNED GRANTED
AGREEMENTS.
WE ARE UNDER CONTRACT.
WE PROCEED SO WE ARE SPENDING
MONEY.
WE ARE ALLOCATING WHETHER
THAT'S THE CHARGE OR PROGRAM
FUNDS TO BUY THOSE CHARGERS
THAT WE'RE PUTTING OUT IN THE
COMMUNITY IF THAT'S OUR
CIRCULAR ECONOMY PLANNING WORK,
YOU'LL SEE A CONTRACT COME
FORWARD FOR THAT.
WE ARE MOVING FORWARD BECAUSE
WE HAVE SIGNED AGREEMENTS WE
WILL COVER FUNDS, WE WILL MAKE
GOOD ON THOSE FUNDS.
THE ONE EXCEPTION THAT I WANT
TO POINT OUT IS SORT OF AN
IRONIC STORY IN THE I GUESS
HALF FULL HALF EMPTY CATEGORY
AS WELL AND THAT IS THE TEN
MILLION FOR BRIAN GEOTHERMAL
PROJECT.
SO THAT FUNDING IS NOT THE ONLY
ONE ON THE SCREEN THAT IS NOT
UNDER A SIGNED GRANT AGREEMENT
.
SO EVERYTHING ELSE IS PRETTY
SOLIDLY PROTECTED.
SO WE'RE CERTAINLY PAYING
ATTENTION TO THAT PARTICULAR
AREA OF FUNDING ON THE
POSITIVE.
HOWEVER IN EXECUTIVE ORDERS
WHAT WE HAVE SEEN IS GEOTHERMAL
IDENTIFIED AS A MUST INVEST IN
TECHNOLOGY.
NOW THAT IS VERY DIFFERENT FROM
SOLAR AND WIND WHICH CALLED OUT
IS DO NOT INVEST IN.
SO WE ACTUALLY FEEL PRETTY
CONFIDENT THAT THE GEOTHERMAL
THERMAL FUNDING IS GOING TO
MOVE FORWARD AND EVEN AS
OF LAST WEEK WE WERE IN
CONVERSATION WITH OUR PROJECT
MANAGER WHO THANKFULLY STILL IS
AT THE US DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
AND HE IS ALSO CONFIDENT THAT
THINGS WILL MOVE FORWARD.
SO WE WILL BE BRINGING YOU
HOPEFULLY A GRANT AGREEMENT ALL
OF THIS IS TO SAY THAT OUR
PHILOSOPHICAL APPROACH IS WE
HAVE SUCCESSFULLY SECURED
THIRTY TWO MILLION DOLLARS AND
WE WILL FIGHT TO MAINTAIN THAT
WE DO NOT EXPECT TO SEE MORE
THIRTY TWO MILLION DOLLARS AND
FUNDING.
WE DO NOT EXPECT TO SEE MORE
I THINK IT IS FAIR TO SAY FROM
FUNDING.
EVERYTHING WE'RE SEEING
I THINK IT IS FAIR TO SAY FROM
FEDERALLY AND EVEN AT THE STATE
EVERYTHING WE'RE SEEING
LEVEL IT IS HIGHLY UNLIKELY WE
FEDERALLY AND EVEN AT THE STATE
WILL SEE INVESTMENTS COMING
LEVEL IT IS HIGHLY UNLIKELY WE
FORWARD FOR CLIMATE AND EQUITY
WILL SEE INVESTMENTS COMING
WORK.
FORWARD FOR CLIMATE AND EQUITY
THOSE ARE AREAS WHERE THE
WORK.
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN VERY
THOSE ARE AREAS WHERE THE
CLEAR THEY ARE NOT PRIORITIES.
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN VERY
SO WE ARE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
CLEAR THEY ARE NOT PRIORITIES.
LOOK FOR PHILANTHROPIC FOR
SO WE ARE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
PARTNERS.
LOOK FOR PHILANTHROPIC FOR
WE'RE GOING TO LEVERAGE WHERE
PARTNERS.
WE CAN.
WE'RE GOING TO LEVERAGE WHERE
WE'RE LEANING IN TO KIND
WE CAN.
OF MORE BREAD AND BUTTER, IF
WE'RE LEANING IN TO KIND
YOU WILL, INITIATIVES LIKE FIRE
OF MORE BREAD AND BUTTER, IF
STATIONS AND FIRE SAFETY
YOU WILL, INITIATIVES LIKE FIRE
ALTHOUGH WE'VE ALSO SEEN
STATIONS AND FIRE SAFETY
FEDERAL FUNDING FOR THOSE
ALTHOUGH WE'VE ALSO SEEN
PROGRAMS CUT AS WELL.
FEDERAL FUNDING FOR THOSE
>> SO WE HAD A REALLY
PROGRAMS CUT AS WELL.
SUCCESSFUL RUN.
>> SO WE HAD A REALLY
WE ARE USED TO IN
SUCCESSFUL RUN.
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICES SADLY
WE ARE USED TO IN
NOT HAVING A LOT OF FUNDING
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICES SADLY
OPPORTUNITY.
NOT HAVING A LOT OF FUNDING
WE'RE GOING TO PRESERVE WHAT
OPPORTUNITY.
WE'VE GOT BUT WE DON'T
WE'RE GOING TO PRESERVE WHAT
ANTICIPATE WHEN WE LOOK INTO
WE'VE GOT BUT WE DON'T
THE HORIZON THAT WE'RE GOING TO
ANTICIPATE WHEN WE LOOK INTO
BE ABLE TO BRING YOU A LOT MORE
THE HORIZON THAT WE'RE GOING TO
FUNDING THAT WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO
BE ABLE TO BRING YOU A LOT MORE
SECURE.
FUNDING THAT WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO
AND AGAIN, THAT'S NOT BECAUSE I
SECURE.
DON'T THINK STAFF ARE CAPABLE
AND AGAIN, THAT'S NOT BECAUSE I
OF BRINGING IN FUNDING BECAUSE
DON'T THINK STAFF ARE CAPABLE
I DON'T THINK WE'RE GOING TO
OF BRINGING IN FUNDING BECAUSE
SEE A LOT SO JUST AS A AS AN
I DON'T THINK WE'RE GOING TO
OVERVIEW HERE, IF YOU HAVE ANY
SEE A LOT SO JUST AS A AS AN
QUESTIONS, LET ME KNOW.
OVERVIEW HERE, IF YOU HAVE ANY
BUT WE'RE STAYING THE COURSE IS
QUESTIONS, LET ME KNOW.
I THINK WHAT I WANT TO SHARE ON
BUT WE'RE STAYING THE COURSE IS
THIS LINE NOW WHAT I ALSO WANT
I THINK WHAT I WANT TO SHARE ON
TO SHARE IS IN TERMS OF OUR
THIS LINE NOW WHAT I ALSO WANT
KIND OF BUDGET ASKS IN THE
TO SHARE IS IN TERMS OF OUR
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICE
KIND OF BUDGET ASKS IN THE
UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICE
OF FEDERAL AND STATE FUNDING IS
UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT
IMPORTANT BECAUSE HISTORICALLY
OF FEDERAL AND STATE FUNDING IS
THAT IS HOW WE'VE SUPPLEMENTED
IMPORTANT BECAUSE HISTORICALLY
A LOT OF THE FUNDING WE'VE BEEN
THAT IS HOW WE'VE SUPPLEMENTED
ABLE TO RECEIVE.
A LOT OF THE FUNDING WE'VE BEEN
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO LEVERAGE IT
ABLE TO RECEIVE.
AT A HIGH LEVEL KNOWING THAT'S
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO LEVERAGE IT
NOT LIKELY.
AT A HIGH LEVEL KNOWING THAT'S
WE SORT OF LOOKED AT AND SAID
NOT LIKELY.
OK, WHAT IS THE LANDSCAPE
WE SORT OF LOOKED AT AND SAID
FUNDAMENTALLY LOOK LIKE?
OK, WHAT IS THE LANDSCAPE
AND A DECISION HAS BEEN MADE
FUNDAMENTALLY LOOK LIKE?
UNDERSTANDABLY THAT EFFECTIVE
AND A DECISION HAS BEEN MADE
THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR THE
UNDERSTANDABLY THAT EFFECTIVE
PORTION OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY
THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR THE
REBATE FROM THE COUNTY MENTAL
PORTION OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY
HEALTH AND PUBLIC SAFETY IS
REBATE FROM THE COUNTY MENTAL
GOING TO MOVE FROM OAC AND THAT
HEALTH AND PUBLIC SAFETY IS
HAS HISTORICALLY BEFORE THE
GOING TO MOVE FROM OAC AND THAT
COMMUNITY CLIMATE ACTION
HAS HISTORICALLY BEFORE THE
MILLICH BEEN OUR PRIMARY SOURCE
COMMUNITY CLIMATE ACTION
OF REVENUE.
MILLICH BEEN OUR PRIMARY SOURCE
IT'S ABOUT ONE POINT TWO
OF REVENUE.
MILLION DOLLARS AND BECAUSE IT
IT'S ABOUT ONE POINT TWO
WAS OUR PRIMARY SOURCE
MILLION DOLLARS AND BECAUSE IT
OF REVENUE, IT'S HOW WE FUNDED
WAS OUR PRIMARY SOURCE
STAFF.
OF REVENUE, IT'S HOW WE FUNDED
SO WE HAVE TO STAFF THAT ARE IN
STAFF.
FUNDING THAT WE HAVE TO MAKE
SO WE HAVE TO STAFF THAT ARE IN
SOME DECISIONS ABOUT WHAT TO DO
FUNDING THAT WE HAVE TO MAKE
WITH THOSE STAFF.
SOME DECISIONS ABOUT WHAT TO DO
WE ALSO HAVE PROGRAMMATIC
WITH THOSE STAFF.
DOLLARS IN THERE BUT WE'VE BEEN
WE ALSO HAVE PROGRAMMATIC
ABLE TO KIND OF WORK THE BUDGET
DOLLARS IN THERE BUT WE'VE BEEN
TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE CAN ABSORB
ABLE TO KIND OF WORK THE BUDGET
SOME OF THAT FUNDING.
TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE CAN ABSORB
ALSO WANT TO POINT OUT THAT WE
SOME OF THAT FUNDING.
ARE RIGHT NOW HOLDING ALL
ALSO WANT TO POINT OUT THAT WE
OF THE STARTUP COSTS IN THE
ARE RIGHT NOW HOLDING ALL
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICE.
OF THE STARTUP COSTS IN THE
SO WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO TAKE SOME
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICE.
OF THOSE GRANTS THAT WE'VE WON,
SO WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO TAKE SOME
NEGOTIATE WITH SOME OF THE
OF THOSE GRANTS THAT WE'VE WON,
FUNDERS TO PULL SOME FUNDING
NEGOTIATE WITH SOME OF THE
ASIDE TO HELP FUND THE
FUNDERS TO PULL SOME FUNDING
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
ASIDE TO HELP FUND THE
BUT WE'VE ALSO MADE CHOICES
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
LIKE WE HAVE A VACANCY IN
BUT WE'VE ALSO MADE CHOICES
ODISSI THAT WE AREN'T GOING TO
LIKE WE HAVE A VACANCY IN
FILL BECAUSE WE NEED THOSE
ODISSI THAT WE AREN'T GOING TO
DOLLARS TO FUND THE EXECUTIVE
FILL BECAUSE WE NEED THOSE
SALARIES, OUR EXECUTIVE
DOLLARS TO FUND THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR SALARY WE NEED THAT
SALARIES, OUR EXECUTIVE
ONE FEE FOR THE ONE FEE WE'D BE
DIRECTOR SALARY WE NEED THAT
HIRING AT THE CITY BECAUSE YOU
ONE FEE FOR THE ONE FEE WE'D BE
KNOW, WE CAN'T JUST HAVE
HIRING AT THE CITY BECAUSE YOU
FUNDING.
KNOW, WE CAN'T JUST HAVE
WE ALSO HAVE TO HAVE THE CAP OR
FUNDING.
MAKE SURE WE INCREASE THAT CAP
WE ALSO HAVE TO HAVE THE CAP OR
IF WE'RE BRINGING ON MORE
MAKE SURE WE INCREASE THAT CAP
STAFF.
IF WE'RE BRINGING ON MORE
>> SO WE'RE ABSORBING THOSE
STAFF.
COSTS AT THE SAME TIME WE'RE
>> SO WE'RE ABSORBING THOSE
LOSING THE PUBLIC SAFETY, THE
COSTS AT THE SAME TIME WE'RE
MENTAL YES.
LOSING THE PUBLIC SAFETY, THE
THE PUBLIC SAFETY REBATE FROM
MENTAL YES.
THE COUNTY AND WE'RE LOSING
THE PUBLIC SAFETY REBATE FROM
SIGHT LINES ON FUTURE FUNDING.
THE COUNTY AND WE'RE LOSING
SO THE ASCUI MADE WAS WE THINK
SIGHT LINES ON FUTURE FUNDING.
WE CAN ABSORB A LOT WE CAN BE
SO THE ASCUI MADE WAS WE THINK
QUITE CREATIVE BUT WE WANTED TO
WE CAN ABSORB A LOT WE CAN BE
PRESERVE WAS TO STAFF AND SO
QUITE CREATIVE BUT WE WANTED TO
THEY ASKED US TO MOVE THEM INTO
PRESERVE WAS TO STAFF AND SO
THE GENERAL FUND AND WHAT YOU
THEY ASKED US TO MOVE THEM INTO
SEE THE VERY LAST BULLET HERE
THE GENERAL FUND AND WHAT YOU
ARE THOSE COSTS THOSE ARE ALL
SEE THE VERY LAST BULLET HERE
IN THAT'S IT.
ARE THOSE COSTS THOSE ARE ALL
THAT'S MUNICIPAL SERVICE
IN THAT'S IT.
CHARGES, THAT'S THEIR SALARY,
THAT'S MUNICIPAL SERVICE
ET CETERA.
CHARGES, THAT'S THEIR SALARY,
AND THAT'S THAT'S THE
ET CETERA.
CUMULATIVE VALUE FOR THOSE TWO
AND THAT'S THAT'S THE
POSITIONS.
CUMULATIVE VALUE FOR THOSE TWO
THE LAST KIND OF BROAD TOPIC
POSITIONS.
BEFORE I GET TO HORIZONS IS I
THE LAST KIND OF BROAD TOPIC
JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU AN
BEFORE I GET TO HORIZONS IS I
UPDATE ON WHERE WE ARE WITH THE
JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU AN
BECAUSE THIS DOES TIE IN TO
UPDATE ON WHERE WE ARE WITH THE
OF COURSE A HUGE COMMITMENT AND
BECAUSE THIS DOES TIE IN TO
WHAT YOU'VE MEANT TO THE VOTERS
OF COURSE A HUGE COMMITMENT AND
THE VOTERS HAVE MADE TO US AND
WHAT YOU'VE MEANT TO THE VOTERS
THAT WE AS A SUSTAINABILITY
THE VOTERS HAVE MADE TO US AND
OFFICE CONTINUE TO MAKE TO THE
THAT WE AS A SUSTAINABILITY
COMMUNITY BROADLY AND IT HAS
OFFICE CONTINUE TO MAKE TO THE
BUDGET RAMIFICATIONS AS WELL.
COMMUNITY BROADLY AND IT HAS
SO GOOD NEWS YOU'VE YOU'VE SEEN
BUDGET RAMIFICATIONS AS WELL.
THE FIRST ORDINANCE, THE FIRST
SO GOOD NEWS YOU'VE YOU'VE SEEN
READING OF THE ORDINANCE FOR
THE FIRST ORDINANCE, THE FIRST
THE SIU.
READING OF THE ORDINANCE FOR
WE'RE COMING WITH THE SECOND
THE SIU.
READING OF THAT ORDINANCE.
WE'RE COMING WITH THE SECOND
WE ALSO ARE MOVING FORWARD WITH
READING OF THAT ORDINANCE.
POSTING FOR THE EXECUTIVE
WE ALSO ARE MOVING FORWARD WITH
DIRECTOR SO WE CAN HIRE A
POSTING FOR THE EXECUTIVE
PERSON TO COME ON BOARD.
DIRECTOR SO WE CAN HIRE A
WE KNOW THAT IN ORDER FOR THE
PERSON TO COME ON BOARD.
EU TO BE OPERATIONAL WE NEED TO
WE KNOW THAT IN ORDER FOR THE
HIT ABOUT 20 MEGAWATT
EU TO BE OPERATIONAL WE NEED TO
OF SUBSCRIBED DEMAND AND THE
HIT ABOUT 20 MEGAWATT
SYSTEM IT CAN BE LOWER IF WE
OF SUBSCRIBED DEMAND AND THE
GET BETTER INTEREST RATES AND
SYSTEM IT CAN BE LOWER IF WE
I'M DELIGHTED TO SHARE WE ARE
GET BETTER INTEREST RATES AND
IN CONVERSATIONS WITH PEOPLE
I'M DELIGHTED TO SHARE WE ARE
WHO LOOK LIKE THEY COULD OFFER
IN CONVERSATIONS WITH PEOPLE
US MUCH LOWER INTEREST RATES
WHO LOOK LIKE THEY COULD OFFER
WHICH MEANS THAT TWENTY
US MUCH LOWER INTEREST RATES
MEGAWATT NUMBER MIGHT FALL TO
WHICH MEANS THAT TWENTY
SOMETHING MORE AKIN TO TWELVE
MEGAWATT NUMBER MIGHT FALL TO
TO FIFTEEN.
SOMETHING MORE AKIN TO TWELVE
ALL DEPENDS ON THE ECONOMICS
TO FIFTEEN.
AND PLAY WE HAVE OVER EIGHT
ALL DEPENDS ON THE ECONOMICS
HUNDRED INDIVIDUAL ADDRESSES
AND PLAY WE HAVE OVER EIGHT
SIGNED UP RIGHT NOW THAT ARE
HUNDRED INDIVIDUAL ADDRESSES
INTERESTED THE EU WE ARE IN
SIGNED UP RIGHT NOW THAT ARE
ACTIVE DISCUSSIONS WITH ANN
INTERESTED THE EU WE ARE IN
ARBOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS ABOUT AN
ACTIVE DISCUSSIONS WITH ANN
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE THEM COME
ARBOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS ABOUT AN
IN IS KIND OF THE ANCHORS WHICH
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE THEM COME
IN FACT MULTIPLE SCHOOLS SIGNED
IN IS KIND OF THE ANCHORS WHICH
UP.
IN FACT MULTIPLE SCHOOLS SIGNED
WE WOULD HIT OUR MARK ALMOST
UP.
INSTANTANEOUSLY.
WE WOULD HIT OUR MARK ALMOST
>> WE COULD START IN THAT WAY
INSTANTANEOUSLY.
SO WE'RE LOOKING AND EXPLORING
>> WE COULD START IN THAT WAY
LOTS OF WAYS TO BRING ON BIG
SO WE'RE LOOKING AND EXPLORING
SUBSCRIBERS IN ADDITION TO OUR
LOTS OF WAYS TO BRING ON BIG
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBERS WHO ARE
SUBSCRIBERS IN ADDITION TO OUR
REALLY EXCITED ABOUT THE
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBERS WHO ARE
PROGRAM I MENTIONED IN THE
REALLY EXCITED ABOUT THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE WE'VE ALSO BEEN
PROGRAM I MENTIONED IN THE
ABLE TO LOOK AT SOME OF THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE WE'VE ALSO BEEN
AWARDS THAT WE'VE SECURED AND
ABLE TO LOOK AT SOME OF THE
CARVE OUT SOME FUNDING TO HELP
AWARDS THAT WE'VE SECURED AND
LAUNCH THE ACTU.
CARVE OUT SOME FUNDING TO HELP
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF THE
LAUNCH THE ACTU.
GEOTHERMAL AWARD COMES IN WE
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF THE
PUT IN FUNDING FOR FIVE STAFF
GEOTHERMAL AWARD COMES IN WE
OF THE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
PUT IN FUNDING FOR FIVE STAFF
UTILITY BECAUSE THE YOU WOULD
OF THE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
OWN THAT GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM SO
UTILITY BECAUSE THE YOU WOULD
WE WERE ABLE TO NEGOTIATE THOSE
OWN THAT GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM SO
COSTS.
WE WERE ABLE TO NEGOTIATE THOSE
NOW OF COURSE WE HAVE TO GET
COSTS.
THAT SIGNED GRANT AGREEMENT IN
NOW OF COURSE WE HAVE TO GET
PLACE BUT WE WOULD BE HIRING
THAT SIGNED GRANT AGREEMENT IN
THOSE FOLKS AFTER THE EXECUTIVE
PLACE BUT WE WOULD BE HIRING
DIRECTOR CAME ON BOARD BECAUSE
THOSE FOLKS AFTER THE EXECUTIVE
THEY NEED TO BUILD THEIR TEAM.
DIRECTOR CAME ON BOARD BECAUSE
THEY KNOW THE EXPERTIZE THAT
THEY NEED TO BUILD THEIR TEAM.
ARE NEEDED IN THEIR THEIR HOUSE
THEY KNOW THE EXPERTIZE THAT
AND IN THEIR SHOP BROADLY
ARE NEEDED IN THEIR THEIR HOUSE
SPEAKING.
AND IN THEIR SHOP BROADLY
>> SO WHERE WE ARE TODAY WE'VE
SPEAKING.
HAD THESE REALLY GREAT
>> SO WHERE WE ARE TODAY WE'VE
CONVERSATIONS WITH FINANCIAL
HAD THESE REALLY GREAT
PARTNERS WHERE WE PUT IN SOME
CONVERSATIONS WITH FINANCIAL
GRANT APPLICATIONS EXPLICITLY
PARTNERS WHERE WE PUT IN SOME
FOR YOU START UP COSTS.
GRANT APPLICATIONS EXPLICITLY
WE'RE TALKING TO RATE FIRMS TO
FOR YOU START UP COSTS.
HELP US FIGURE OUT HOW WE CAN
WE'RE TALKING TO RATE FIRMS TO
DO THE FINAL RATE ANALYSIS WE
HELP US FIGURE OUT HOW WE CAN
ARE SENDING BIWEEKLY UPDATES TO
DO THE FINAL RATE ANALYSIS WE
THOSE WHO JOIN THE WAIT LIST.
ARE SENDING BIWEEKLY UPDATES TO
WE'RE WORKING ON A COMMUNITY
THOSE WHO JOIN THE WAIT LIST.
ENGAGEMENT PLAN.
WE'RE WORKING ON A COMMUNITY
WE'RE STARTING NEIGHBORHOOD
ENGAGEMENT PLAN.
BLOCK PARTIES IN THREE WEEKS
WE'RE STARTING NEIGHBORHOOD
WHICH WILL BE WONDERFUL TO GET
BLOCK PARTIES IN THREE WEEKS
FOLKS EXCITED ABOUT THE SIU AND
WHICH WILL BE WONDERFUL TO GET
GENERATE SOME MORE INTEREST AND
FOLKS EXCITED ABOUT THE SIU AND
SUPPORT.
GENERATE SOME MORE INTEREST AND
AND THEN THE GOAL IS THAT FOR
SUPPORT.
SOME OF THE FUNDERS WE MIGHT
AND THEN THE GOAL IS THAT FOR
ACTUALLY HAVE TO HAVE A
SOME OF THE FUNDERS WE MIGHT
COMMITMENT BY END OF THE YEAR
ACTUALLY HAVE TO HAVE A
WHICH IS PRETTY BIG MEANING WE
COMMITMENT BY END OF THE YEAR
COULD IN FACT BY THE OF TWENTY
WHICH IS PRETTY BIG MEANING WE
SIX HAVE SIU ASSETS IN THE
COULD IN FACT BY THE OF TWENTY
GROUND GENERATING ELECTRICITY
SIX HAVE SIU ASSETS IN THE
AND REVENUE FOR THE CITY.
GROUND GENERATING ELECTRICITY
SO IT IS NOT FAST ENOUGH FOR
AND REVENUE FOR THE CITY.
OUR RESIDENTS.
SO IT IS NOT FAST ENOUGH FOR
WE ALL KNOW THAT AND YET
OUR RESIDENTS.
INCREDIBLY FAST ON OUR SIDE
WE ALL KNOW THAT AND YET
HAVING INCUBATED I GUESS SO
INCREDIBLY FAST ON OUR SIDE
GRATITUDE TO ALL THE CITY STAFF
HAVING INCUBATED I GUESS SO
THAT ARE WORKING ON THIS.
GRATITUDE TO ALL THE CITY STAFF
BUT I WOULD SAY IN THE MOMENT
THAT ARE WORKING ON THIS.
THAT WE'RE IN IF YOU HAVE
BUT I WOULD SAY IN THE MOMENT
ANYONE WHO'S INTERESTED IN THE
THAT WE'RE IN IF YOU HAVE
SIU, IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS YOU
ANYONE WHO'S INTERESTED IN THE
WANT TO TALK TO YOUR
SIU, IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS YOU
CONSTITUENTS, PLEASE LET US
WANT TO TALK TO YOUR
KNOW WE'RE HAPPY TO GO OUT AND
CONSTITUENTS, PLEASE LET US
CONTINUE TO LET FOLKS KNOW
KNOW WE'RE HAPPY TO GO OUT AND
THERE'S A LOT THAT IS UNFOLDING
CONTINUE TO LET FOLKS KNOW
IN REGARDS TO THE SIU CREATION.
THERE'S A LOT THAT IS UNFOLDING
WE DON'T WANT PEOPLE TO KIND
IN REGARDS TO THE SIU CREATION.
OF FILL THEIR OWN NARRATIVE OR
WE DON'T WANT PEOPLE TO KIND
BUILD THEIR OWN NARRATIVE ABOUT
OF FILL THEIR OWN NARRATIVE OR
WHAT WE'RE DOING.
BUILD THEIR OWN NARRATIVE ABOUT
WE'RE DOING A LOT OUT HERE AND
WHAT WE'RE DOING.
WE'RE VERY EXCITED TO BRING
WE'RE DOING A LOT OUT HERE AND
THIS TO FRUITION.
WE'RE VERY EXCITED TO BRING
>> SO JUST TO CLOSE OUT SOME
THIS TO FRUITION.
OF THE ISSUES THAT WE'RE BEKESI
>> SO JUST TO CLOSE OUT SOME
EXCITED TO OVERCOME IN OSSI WE
OF THE ISSUES THAT WE'RE BEKESI
ARE YOU CONSIDER AMERICORPS
EXCITED TO OVERCOME IN OSSI WE
MEMBERS WE'RE BIGGER THAN SPACE
ARE YOU CONSIDER AMERICORPS
ALLOWS.
MEMBERS WE'RE BIGGER THAN SPACE
>> WE PHYSICALLY HAVE TEN SEATS
ALLOWS.
FOR TWENTY NINE PEOPLE.
>> WE PHYSICALLY HAVE TEN SEATS
>> RIGHT.
FOR TWENTY NINE PEOPLE.
SO WE CAN'T HAVE THE WHOLE TEAM
>> RIGHT.
IN THE OFFICE AT ANY POINT.
SO WE CAN'T HAVE THE WHOLE TEAM
WE'RE WORKING ON A STRATEGY
IN THE OFFICE AT ANY POINT.
COLLECTIVELY HERE AT THE CITY
WE'RE WORKING ON A STRATEGY
TO FIGURE HOW WE CAN HOTEL,
COLLECTIVELY HERE AT THE CITY
MAKE SURE THAT SPACE IS
TO FIGURE HOW WE CAN HOTEL,
ACCESSIBLE FOR EVERYONE WHO
MAKE SURE THAT SPACE IS
NEEDS AND THAT'LL BE WONDERFUL
ACCESSIBLE FOR EVERYONE WHO
FOR OUR TEAM SHOCKINGLY WE HAVE
NEEDS AND THAT'LL BE WONDERFUL
A LOT OF EXTROVERTS AND THEY
FOR OUR TEAM SHOCKINGLY WE HAVE
NEED TO BE TOGETHER.
A LOT OF EXTROVERTS AND THEY
THEY NEED TO CROSS POLLINATE
NEED TO BE TOGETHER.
AND SO I'M EXCITED TO ACTUALLY
THEY NEED TO CROSS POLLINATE
HAVE SPACE TO DO THAT WITH THEM
AND SO I'M EXCITED TO ACTUALLY
.
HAVE SPACE TO DO THAT WITH THEM
WE ARE GOING TO BE REALLY
.
INVESTED IN THIS COMING YEAR
WE ARE GOING TO BE REALLY
AND GROWING COMMERCIAL WORK.
INVESTED IN THIS COMING YEAR
AND ONE OF THE THINGS I DIDN'T
AND GROWING COMMERCIAL WORK.
SAY ON THE SLIDE THE PRESSURE
AND ONE OF THE THINGS I DIDN'T
WE SORT OF FEEL IS THE BUDGET
SAY ON THE SLIDE THE PRESSURE
CONSTRICTS IS MORE AND MORE
WE SORT OF FEEL IS THE BUDGET
PEOPLE WANT MORE AND MORE OF US
CONSTRICTS IS MORE AND MORE
WHICH IS WONDERFUL BECAUSE THAT
PEOPLE WANT MORE AND MORE OF US
MEANS THEY KNOW ABOUT US AND
WHICH IS WONDERFUL BECAUSE THAT
THEY WANT TO ENGAGE IN THE
MEANS THEY KNOW ABOUT US AND
MOVEMENT.
THEY WANT TO ENGAGE IN THE
THE DOWNSIDE IS TAKE FOR
MOVEMENT.
EXAMPLE OUR REBATE PROGRAM.
THE DOWNSIDE IS TAKE FOR
THAT REBATE PROGRAM IS FOR
EXAMPLE OUR REBATE PROGRAM.
RESIDENTIAL.
THAT REBATE PROGRAM IS FOR
IT'S MULTIFAMILY
THAT SINGLE
FAMILY IT'S ONE POINT NINE
MILLION.
THAT'S SIMPLY NOT ENOUGH MONEY
TO HELP HOUSES OF WORSHIP AND
NONPROFITS AND EVERY BUSINESS
AND EVERY MAJOR INSTITUTION WHO
REALLY WANTS SUPPORT IS EAGER
TO DO SOMETHING AND COULD BE A
GREAT STORY AND CATALYST FOR
MORE MOVEMENT.
THERE JUST SIMPLY ISN'T ENOUGH
MONEY TO HELP EVERYBODY DO WHAT
THEY WANT TO DO.
>> SO WE'RE GETTING THIS KIND
OF ADDITIONAL PRESSURE PUT ON
WHICH WE THINK IS LOVELY BUT
WE'VE GOT TO FIND A WAY TO
SUPPORT THE ECOSYSTEM MORE
BROADLY SO WE'LL HAVE SOME
IDEAS COMING FORWARD.
BUT AGAIN THAT'S ANOTHER BUDGET
THAT SORT OF AN UNFORTUNATE
TIMING AND COINCIDENCE IN TERMS
OF ALL THE EVENTS HAPPENING AT
ONCE.
AND THEN I THINK YOU'RE GOING
TO SEE IF I HAD TO PICK THE
THEME FOR TWENTY SIX FISCAL
TWENTY SIX IT'S GOING TO
CIRCULAR ECONOMY.
PEOPLE ARE REALLY EXCITED ABOUT
IT.
YOU MIGHT HAVE JUST SEEN OUR
ELECTRONICS TAKE BACK EVENT IS
COMING UP BUT WE HAVE SO MUCH
INTEREST AND IT'S SO TANGIBLE
AND PERSONAL FOR PEOPLE TO BE
INVOLVED IN A CIRCULAR ECONOMY
THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE DOING A
LOT OF WORK IN THAT AREA.
SO CIRCULAR ECONOMY AND
COMMERCIAL ENGAGEMENT REALLY
ARE THE TWO SPACES I THINK
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE I HAVE TO
SOLVE FOR NOT AGAIN NOT IN A
NEGATIVE WHAT AN OPPORTUNITY TO
BE ABLE TO WALK INTO THOSE
SPACES BUT WE'RE NOT GOING TO
PRETEND THAT WE HAVE ALL THE
ANSWERS.
SO WE'RE EXCITED TO BE ENGAGING
WITH OUR COMMUNITY TO
CO IDENTIFY STRATEGIES AND
SOLUTIONS TO DO WHAT WE'VE ALL
SET OUT TO DO WHICH IS EQUABLY
DECARBONIZE EVER.
SO WITH THAT I'LL JUST SAY
QUESTIONS CONCERNS HARPUR YES.
>> THANK YOU.
I HAVE A QUESTION ABOUT JUST
SPENDING THE MONEY THAT WE
HAVE, YOU KNOW, BEEN AWARDED.
ARE YOU SAYING THAT WE HAVE THE
MONEY IN HAND AND LIKE HOW ARE
WE MITIGATING THE RISK
OF SPENDING THE MONEY WE HAVE
THE MONEY IN HAND.
YEAH I MAY HAVE TO TURN TO OUR
EXTRAORDINARY ATTORNEY HERE FOR
SOME ASSISTANCE BUT
PHILOSOPHICALLY THE WAY THAT
WE'RE APPROACHING THIS IS WE
HAVE NO STOP WORK ORDERS.
WE CAN STILL DRAW DOWN FUNDS
AND SO WE ARE WE'RE STAYING
TRUE TO OUR GRANT AGREEMENTS.
WE'RE MAKING SURE IF WE SAID
WE'D REPORT IN A CERTAIN DATE
WE REPORT ON THAT DATE WE ARE
GIVING NO REASON TO TO HAVE A
GRANT TERMINATED AND WE ARE
SPENDING WHICH MEANS WE'RE
GOING INTO THE SYSTEM AND WE'RE
COLLECTING AND GETTING
REIMBURSED FROM THOSE THOSE
FUNDS.
IT IS POSSIBLE LET ME JUST
SUPERB TRANSPARENTLY TELL YOU
WE HAVE HAD SOME THREATS TO
THAT FUNDING.
RIGHT.
AND ALL OF THOSE THREATS HAVE
SORT OF MADE US I DON'T KNOW
HOW ELSE TO DESCRIBE IT A PING
PONG BALL IS SORT OF LIKE
BOUNCING BACK AND FORTH.
IS THIS DEAD ?
IS THIS ALIVE AND WHAT TENDS TO
HAPPEN IS WE'LL SEE SOMETHING
OUT OF DC AND THEN AN
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT OR SOME
SORT OF COURT WILL PUT A STAY
ON IT AND THEN THE GUIDANCES
PROCEED CONTINUE SPENDING.
THOSE DAYS HAVE BEEN SOMETIMES
PERMANENT, SOMETIMES TEMPORARY
.
SO EACH GRANT IN THAT HAS A
DIFFERENT TRACKER WHERE WE'RE
MONITORING AND FOLLOWING.
BUT I WOULD SAY I HAVE HIGH
CONFIDENCE THAT IF SOMEONE
TRIES TO TAKE AWAY SOMETHING
THAT WE'VE RIGHTLY WANTED, IT
IS NOT LEGAL.
WE WILL CHALLENGE THE LEGALITY
OF THAT IN WHATEVER MEANS
SEEMED MOST APPROPRIATE TO
COUNSEL
.
THANK YOU.
WITH THAT I BELIEVE I GET TO
TURN OVER TO MR. SECURITY.
MR. WEERD GOOD EVENING.
>> YOU ALL KNOW WHO I AM AT
THIS POINT.
I'M PROBABLY GOING TO START
WITH THE SECOND MOST
COMPLICATED PLAN OVER THE NEXT
YEAR WILL BE THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE CITY'S COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN THROUGH THE PLANNING
DEPARTMENT.
WE ARE STARTING HERE WITH WHAT
IS THE HORIZON ISSUE OVER THE
NEXT SIX TO 12 MONTHS PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT WILL AND WILL
CONTINUE ON THOSE THOSE
RECOMMENDATIONS.
THE PLAN IS BEING DRAFTED RIGHT
NOW.
I THINK MUCH OF COUNCIL IS
AWARE THAT THIS IS THE POINT
WHERE I STOOD UP HERE LAST YEAR
AND TOLD YOU THAT
IMPLEMENTATION WAS GOING TO BE
THE HARD PART.
RIGHT.
THAT DOING THE PLAN WAS GOING
TO BE RELATIVELY EASY.
BUT ONCE THE PLAN STARTED
MOVING TO IMPLEMENTATION, WE
WERE GOING TO SEE WHERE THE
DIFFICULT PART COMES AND THAT
IS WHERE WE ARE NOW.
IN FACT, THERE'S A LOT
OF DISCUSSION ABOUT HOW THE
ZONING OR HOW THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN WILL BE IMPLEMENTED.
THERE'S A LOT OF CONVERSATION
ABOUT WHAT WE WANT TO SEE
WHAT'S GOING TO BE IMPLEMENTED
BEFORE WE AGREE TO THE PLAN AND
THESE ARE THE DIFFICULT
DECISIONS THAT ARE GOING TO
COME OVER THE NEXT YEAR.
WE HAVE HAD CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
ACCELERATING THE IMPLEMENTATION
WHICH WOULD BE THE REWRITE
OF THE UDC, THE DEVELOPMENT
CODE SO THAT THE TWO PROJECTS
COULD RUN CONCURRENTLY FOR THE
LAST PORTION OF THIS WHICH
WOULD ALLOW PEOPLE TO
UNDERSTAND WHERE AND WHAT
CONCERNS ARE ADDRESSED AND
WHERE AND WHAT PARTS OF THIS
PROCESS IT ALSO POTENTIALLY HAS
THE ISSUE OF HAVING TWO
CONCURRENT PROCESSES GOING AT
THE SAME TIME THAT ARE
DEPENDENT ON EACH OTHER.
SO WE THEN TALKING ABOUT THE
PROS AND CONS OF THAT THAT
REWRITE FROM A FINANCIAL
STANDPOINT WE DID NOT PUT MONEY
IN THE BUDGET FOR TWENTY SIX
FOR IT.
THERE IS A VERY GOOD CHANCE
THAT WILL BE COMING PRIOR TO
THE COMPLETION OF THE TWENTY
FIVE BUDGET WITH A PROPOSAL ON
A CONTRACT FOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OR THE REWRITE
OF THE UDC WHICH WE CALL KIND
OF THE IMPLEMENTATION SECTION
OF IT PRIOR TO THIS BUDGET
BEING ADOPTED SO AS TO START
THAT PROCESS AND HAVE THOSE
PEOPLE IN PLACE PRIOR TO IF FOR
SOME REASON THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN
WE WOULD BE GOING BACK TO MR.
DE HONY AND ASKING FOR THAT
MONEY AND SOME COMBINATION
OF TWENTY SIX TWENTY SEVEN.
SO IT'S NOT IN THE BUDGET RIGHT
NOW BUT WE THOUGHT WE WOULD PUT
THIS ON HERE IS THE NUMBER AND
SLIDE FOR PLANNING BECAUSE THIS
IS GOING TO BE THE THING THAT
PLANNING HAS TO DEAL WITH FOR
THE NEXT 12 TO 18 MONTHS SOME
COMBINATION OF THE COMPLAN
ADOPTION AND THEN CONVERTING
THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS INTO
IMPLEMENTABLE ZONING DISTRICTS
NOT TO MENTION THE PROCESS
POTENTIALLY OF REZONING
PROPERTIES COME INTO COMPLIANCE
WITH THOSE NEW DISTRICTS.
THAT IS GOING TO BE A MASSIVE
UNDERTAKING AT LEAST ON PAR
WITH THE CREATION OF THE PLAN.
IT IS WHERE ALL THE DETAILS GO
AND IT WILL BE IT WILL BE THE
BULK OF THE NEXT YEAR'S WORK
FOR THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT
OTHER THAN PROJECT MANAGEMENT.
SO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT COME
ALONG WITH THAT ARE THE
CONSIDERATION
OF INFRASTRUCTURE.
HOW DOES THAT PLAY A ROLE IN IT
?
COMMITMENT TO ONGOING FUTURE
PLANNING NEEDS AND FUTURE
CORRIDOR STUDIES?
ALL OF THAT WILL COME AS
IMPLEMENTATION RECOMMENDATIONS
AS PART OF THE PLAN.
BUT EVERY ONE OF THOSE WILL
COME WITH SOME KIND OF RESOURCE
CAPACITY OR FUNDING COMPONENT
WITH IT.
SO WHETHER IT'S IN TWENTY SIX
OR WHETHER THE RESULTS OF THIS
END UP IN THE TWENTY SEVEN
BUDGET YOU WILL SEE BUDGET ASKS
FOR THIS COMING FORWARD IN THE
NEAR FUTURE DEPARTMENT REVIEW
AND CUSTOMER SERVICE FROM THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT SIDE WE DID
PUT A SET WHAT WE'RE CALLING A
SITE PLAN COORDINATOR OR
COMPLIANCE OFFICER IN THE IN
THE BUDGET.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT CAME IN
COMBINATION WITH PUBLIC
SERVICES AND A LOT OF WORK THAT
WAS UNCROSSED DEPARTMENTALLY.
WHERE ARE THE BIGGEST
ROADBLOCKS OR IMPEDIMENTS TO
GETTING PROJECTS THROUGH THE
PROCESS INTO THE GROUND AND
PAYING TAXES?
WE SPEND AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT
OF TIME LOOKING FOR WAYS
THROUGH THE UTILIZATION
OF STREAM OR OTHER PROJECTS TO
NOT HAVE THIS HAVE TO BE A
POSITION SOMEONE THAT ACTUALLY
GOES OUT AND WORKS WITH THE
PROJECT OWNERS ON HOW TO GET
THROUGH THE PROCESS AND HOW TO
COMPLETE THEIR PROJECTS SO THEY
CAN GET OCCUPANCY.
THAT HAS CONTINUED TO BE AN
ISSUE OR MAYBE THE NUMBER ONE
ISSUE WE HAVE AS PROJECTS MOVE
FROM THE PLANNING APPROVAL TO
THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT, THERE
IS AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF THINGS
THAT COME WITH THAT PROJECT
THROUGH THE PROCESS WHICH
LEAVES LOTS OF ROOM FOR
CONFUSION'S OR THINGS TO BE
LEFT OUT OR DISCOVERED AT THE
END WE GET A LOT OF TIME WITH
PUBLIC SERVICES TRYING TO
DETERMINE IF THIS POSITION
WOULD BE OF ASSISTANCE TO THOSE
OUTSIDE AGENCIES.
WE FEEL LIKE THERE IS A MASSIVE
NEED FOR THIS POSITION AND IT
WILL HELP PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING
TO GET PROJECTS DONE, GET THEM
DONE QUICKER WITH THE CITY SO
THEY WILL CROSS DEPARTMENTALLY
TO MAKE SURE ALL OF THE ISSUES
ASSOCIATED WITH A PLAN AND
APPROVAL ARE TRACKED
APPROPRIATELY AND ARE NOT
SURPRISE IS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
COMMUNITY AT THE END OF THE
PROCESS.
SO THAT IS THE EMPLOYING THAT
POSITION THE ZONING COORDINATOR
PART TIME TO FULL TIME IN THE
ADDITIONAL ZONING COORDINATOR
HAS PROVED TO BE INVALUABLE TO
US.
IT IS A PROMISING NOMINAL BUT
IT IS NOT A MASSIVE COST TO
MOVE THAT PERSON FROM TIME TO
FULL TIME.
IT DOES FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE I'VE BEEN IN THE CITY.
GIVE US TO PEOPLE WORKING WITH
THE COMMUNITY ZONING
COMPLIANCE.
WE'VE HAD ONE PERSON FOR THE
LAST TEN YEARS DOING THAT.
THAT PERSON IS GROWING CLOSER
TO RETIREMENT TOO.
SO THIS DOES GIVE US SOME
SUCCESSION IN THAT ROLE.
I DON'T WANT TO SAY LET'S JUST
BE PROACTIVE YET BUT IT DOES
ALLOW US TO BE A LITTLE LESS
REACTIVE POTENTIALLY WITHIN THE
COMMUNITY WHEN IT COMES TO
ZONING COMPLIANCE AND WE THINK
THAT IS HELPFUL TO THE FOLKS
WHO WANT TO WORK WITH US AS
WELL.
FROM A PARKS STANDPOINT, WE'VE
ASKED FOR INCREASE IN STAFFING
TEMP STAFFING INCREASES AND
SUPPLIES LOTS OF GENERAL
INCREASES.
THOSE ARE ALL COVERED BY
INCREASES IN FEES AND FEE
ADJUSTMENTS AND MINOR THINGS
YOU'LL SEE THAT NIGHT.
SO THERE'S REALLY NO NEGATIVE
COST ASSOCIATED REALLY WITH
ANYTHING IN PARKS IN TWENTY
SEVEN WE ARE LOOKING AT
RECREATION COORDINATOR AND
POTENTIALLY ONE OTHER PART TIME
TO EVERYTHING WE'RE BRINGING
FORWARD WITH PARKS IS IF IT
IMPACTS THE GENERAL FUND IS
COVERED BY SOME DECREASE IN
SOME OTHER PLACE, SOME TYPE
OF OFFSET OR SOME TYPE
OF REVENUE FEE GENERATION THAT
HAS IS FAR OUT OF DATE.
I THINK EVERYBODY KNOWS FROM
THE TIMES I'VE BEEN ON PARKS
FEES ARE REALLY REASONABLY
SCALED COMPARED TO OTHER
COMMUNITIES.
WE DO HAVE ROOM TO MAKE SOME
ADJUSTMENTS TO PROVIDE THE CAP
THE CAPACITY WE NEED AND THOSE
ADJUSTMENTS ARE BEING MADE AS
PART OF THIS THESE
RECOMMENDATIONS FULLY
COVERED CONTRIBUTION FOR NEW
VEHICLES AND A NEW PLANNING
COORDINATOR.
THOSE ARE REALLY THE TASKS OUT
OF THE MILLAGE.
THOSE THOSE POSITIONS WILL BE
PARTIALLY PAID FOR FROM FEES,
GENERAL FUND OTHER THINGS AND
PARTIALLY PAID FOR FROM THE
VILLAGE.
SO THAT'S WHERE WE GET THE
MONEY AND ARE ABLE TO NOT
IMPACT THE GENERAL FUND
BUILDING AND RENTAL.
WE ARE ASKING THIS IS PROBABLY
MAYBE THE MOST STRAIGHTFORWARD
ASK HAVE TO EASE THOSE RENTAL
INSPECTORS IS WHAT THOSE ARE.
THOSE ARE GENERAL FUND
INSPECTORS
.
WE HAVE SPENT A LOT OF TIME
OVER THE LAST EIGHT YEARS
TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT EACH
RENTAL INSPECTOR IS COST
NEUTRAL COVID COST US A LOT
OF TIME AND EFFORT IN THAT THEY
WERE NOT REVENUE NEUTRAL WHEN
WE GOT HERE WE DO WE HAVE ABOUT
THIRTY THOUSAND RENTAL UNITS IN
THE CITY.
WE'RE ABLE TO INSPECT ABOUT
THREE TO FIVE THOUSAND OF THEM
PER YEAR.
WE'D LIKE TO GET INTO EVERY ONE
OF THOSE UNITS ON A THREE YEAR
CYCLE.
WE JUST CAN'T DO IT WITH THAT
WITH THE STAFF WE HAVE WE NOW
BELIEVE WE HAVE A STRUCTURE AND
A FEE SCHEDULE SET THAT EACH
POSITION PAYS FOR ITSELF
THROUGH THE NUMBER
OF INSPECTIONS THEY DO.
IT IS IMPORTANT THAT THEY DO
RENTAL INSPECTIONS THAT THEY
NOT BE MOVED OVER TO DO OTHER
THINGS BECAUSE WHEN THEY'RE NOT
DOING INSPECTIONS THEY ARE THEN
LOSING THAT REVENUE GENERATION
AND BECOME A NEGATIVE DRAG ON
THE GENERAL FUND.
SO WE HAVE TO KEEP THEM
SCHEDULED.
I THINK WE TRY TO KEEP THEM
SCHEDULED EIGHTY PERCENT
OF THEIR DAY.
BUT IN DOING SO WE HAVE NOW
HAVE AT LEAST ONE OR TWO YEAR
TREND WHERE THEY ARE PAYING FOR
THEIR INDIVIDUAL COSTS.
SO WE ARE NOW IN A POSITION TO
TRY TO INCREASE THOSE TO GET
INTO MORE UNITS WITHIN THAT
THREE OR FOUR YEAR RANGE THIS
WILL HELP US IMMENSELY.
THIS PUTS US FROM SIX DEDICATED
RENTAL INSPECTORS OF FOUR.
THE ASSOCIATED COSTS WITH THAT
ARE ALL THINGS THAT GO ALONG
WITH WHAT WE NEED TO DO TO
PROVIDE THAT SERVICE WHETHER
IT'S CARS OR OTHER THINGS.
THE BIGGEST ISSUE WE'RE HAVING
IN BUILDING IS JUST ATTRACTING
EVERYBODY IS GOING THROUGH
THIS.
WE'RE HAVING A VERY HARD TIME
ATTRACTING TALENT THAT HAS THE
APPROPRIATE CERTIFICATIONS AND
INSPECTIONS.
IT'S CAUSING US TO MOVE SOME
PEOPLE AROUND AND USE THEM
OUTSIDE RESOURCES TO MAKE SURE
WE HAVE ENOUGH LICENSE
INSPECTORS.
>> OUR BUILDING DEPARTMENT
SIMILAR TO SOME OTHER
DEPARTMENTS IN THE CITY HAS
TAKEN A PROACTIVE APPROACH WITH
THE STATE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
A WAY TO LESSEN OR SIMPLIFY THE
CERTIFICATION STANDARDS ALMOST
ALLOWING US TO HIRE JOURNEYMEN
INSPECTORS SIMILAR TO WHAT YOU
WOULD HIRE A JOURNEYMAN RATE
PERSON SO THEY DON'T HAVE TO
HAVE THE LEVEL OF SKILL WE'RE
HAVING MIXED RESULTS WITH THAT
BUT WE WOULD LIKE TO BE A PILOT
COMMUNITY WHERE WE BRING IN NON
CERTIFIED INSPECTORS TO WORK
WITH OUR INSPECTORS FOR A
CERTAIN TIME AND THEN HAVE THAT
AUTOMATICALLY TURNED INTO STATE
OF MICHIGAN INSPECTION
CERTIFICATION.
SO THIS HAS BEEN WORKING ON
THAT FOR QUITE SOME TIME.
YEAH, THE BIG THING IS IS WE
JUST HAVE AND I SAID THIRTY
THOUSAND UNITS WE'RE SEEING
THOUSANDS OF UNITS COME ONLINE
EVERY COUPLE OF YEARS NOW WITH
WITH THE GROWTH WE UNDERSTAND
THAT THE CITY WANTS TO SEE
ADDITIONAL GROWTH GROWTH IN
HOUSING THAT'S GOING TO
INCORPORATE MORE RENTAL HOUSING
THAT'S GOING TO INCORPORATE A
NEED TO GET INTO MORE UNITS ON
A REGULAR BASIS.
THIS IS IN PART GEARING UP FOR
THAT AS WELL.
THAT'S HOW I GOT IT.
I CAN TELL YOU ALL ABOUT THE
PARKS CAPITAL STUDY BUT WE'LL
COME BACK ON ANOTHER DAY AND
SPEND A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF TIME TALKING ABOUT THAT AS
WELL.
>> YES OF QUESTION A COUPLE
OF SLIDES BACK, RODNEY.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE NUMBER
OF FTE I THINK YOU WERE ADDING
TO THE INSPECTIONS SO IT'S AN
ADDITIONAL FORTY FIVE YEARS.
>> WHAT'S THE TOTAL THAT WOULD
BE FOR RENTAL THAT GIVES US TEN
OK, TOTAL WITH BUILDING
INSPECTORS WHICH ARE ALSO THE
DSA AS IT PUTS US RIGHT ABOUT A
THIRTY THANKS.
YEP.
YES.
I DON'T HAVE A QUESTION I HAVE
A COMMENT FIRST OF ALL SHOUT
OUT TO THE PHOTO OF THE DOG
PARK.
THAT WAS PRETTY AWESOME.
I'M JUST REALLY PLEASED TO SEE
THAT THE ATTENTION IS GIVEN TO
CUSTOMER SERVICE AND THAT NEW
SITE PLAN COORDINATOR POSITION.
I THINK THAT THAT'S GOING TO DO
ESPECIALLY AS WE WANT MORE
PROJECTS TO COME ONLINE AND WE
WANT TO REALLY FOCUS ON THE
EXPERIENCE PEOPLE DOING
BUSINESS WITH THE CITY.
I THINK THAT'S GOING TO HELP TO
MOVE THE NEEDLE AND JUST KUDOS
TO YOUR TEAM FOR THINKING THAT
THROUGH AND BEING COMMITTED TO
MAKING IT HAPPEN AS PART OF THE
BUDGET.
I WOULD BE REMISS IF I DIDN'T
MAKE A SHOUT OUT WHEN WE TALKED
TO MILTON ABOUT WE NOW HAVE A
BUILDING PERMIT LIAISON WHO IS
GETTING UP TO SPEED AND IS
EVERY DAY FINDING WAYS TO BE
MORE HELPFUL FOR PEOPLE WHO
WANT TO HAVE BASICALLY SOMEONE
TO HOLD YOUR HAND REGARDLESS
OF WHO YOU ARE FROM THE TIME
YOU WANT TO ISSUE A BUILDING
PERMIT TO ASK ABOUT WE'VE HAD A
STAFF PERSON THAT'S BEEN ABLE
TO HELP WITH THE CFO STUFF BUT
IN APPROVING OUR POSITION LAST
YEAR AND GETTING IT HIRED WE
NOW HAVE SOMEONE THAT GREETS
PEOPLE AT THE DOOR IS PRIMARILY
RESPONSIBLE FOR PHONE CALLS AND
THEN THIS PERSON REALLY FILLS
IN THE GAP BETWEEN THE SITE
PLAN PORTION OF IT AND THAT
BUILDING PORTION OF IT MAKING
SURE EVERYTHING THAT'S
ASSOCIATED WITH THESE PROJECTS
TRACK THROUGH THE YEARS.
SO THE ABILITY TO PUT ALL THREE
OF THOSE IN POSITION OVER THE
LAST THREE YEARS IS REALLY
HELPING US AT THIS POINT.
SO I APPRECIATE BUT IT'S IT'S A
SHARED THANK YOU FOR SHARING
GOVERNMENT.
>> SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT I UNDERSTOOD THAT THOUGH
YOU HAVE NOT PUT A REQUEST IN
THE FBI 2006 BUDGET FOR PLAN
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
IMPLEMENTATION FOR YOUR OPEN TO
COMING BACK TO US FOR THAT
MONEY IF YOU DECIDE THAT YOU DO
WANT TO TRY TO RUN
IMPLEMENTATION CONCURRENT WITH
THE FINAL STAGES OF DRAFTING AN
APPROVAL.
>> YES, OK, BECAUSE THOSE FINAL
STAGES OF DRAFTING APPROVAL ARE
LIKELY TO GO ALMOST TO THE END
OF THE CALENDAR YEAR 25.
YEP, RIGHT.
>> OK, WE ARE VERY INTERESTED.
THERE IS A LOT OF SIGNIFICANT
THOUGHT ABOUT THE IDEA
OF HAVING THE KIND GROUP THAT'S
GOING TO ASSIST US WITH WRITING
THE UDC.
WE IT'S A NECESSARY CAPACITY
ISSUE TO BE ON BOARD AS THE
PLAN IS ROUNDING INTO SHAPE TO
LESSEN THE LEARNING CURVE
OF THAT GROUP AS TO HOW TO TAKE
THE THINGS THAT ARE BEING
PROPOSED AND BE ABLE TO OFFER
FEEDBACK ON HOW THEY WILL BE
IMPLEMENTED.
USUALLY IT'S ONE ENDS AND THEN
IT'S A YEAR UNTIL YOU GET THE
OTHER CONTRACTOR ON BOARD AND
YOU HAVE TO BRING THEM UP TO
SPEED AND EVERYTHING ELSE.
THE IDEA OF OVERLAP BASED ON
THE AMOUNT OF WORK WE'RE DOING
HAS APPEAL.
I'M NOT GOING TO LIE.
IT HAS THE POTENTIAL TO BE
CONFUSING RUNNING TWO PROCESSES
AT THE SAME TIME WE ARE LOOKING
INTO PROPOSALS AND TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW THAT WOULD WORK
BEFORE WE BRING THAT COST TO
YOU.
BUT I WOULD ANTICIPATE IT'LL BE
HERE BEFORE FISCAL TWENTY SIX
KICKS IN IN JULY AT LEAST THE
CONTRACT I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
OF THE WORK WILL BE UP AND
RUNNING BUT THAT WILL ALLOW US
TO GET THEM STARTED
TRANSFERRING ALL THE GOOD STUFF
THAT GOES ON FOR THE FIRST TWO
MONTHS AND THEN TO THROW ONE
MORE BALL INTO THE MIX.
AT ONE POINT I HEARD TALK
OF COMBINING A REVISION OF THE
UDC WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE PLAN BECAUSE IT MIGHT BE
MORE DIFFICULT TO STUFF THE
COMP PLAN CHANGES INTO THE
EXISTING NEW DC THAN TO REVISE
THE UDC.
>> YES, THAT'S STILL AN ACTIVE
THOUGHT.
YEAH, IT IS REVISED AS A STAFF
RECOMMENDATION RIGHT NOW.
RIGHT NOW IS WE BELIEVE SIMILAR
TO WHAT WE DID WITH THE COMP
PLAN.
THERE IS SOME MUCH HISTORY
CROSS COMPETING INFORMATION
TRYING TO TAKE THE EXISTING UDC
AND THEN RESTRUCTURE WITH THE
NEW INFORMATION WILL BE MORE
DIFFICULT THAN TAKING IT,
SETTING IT ASIDE AND BUILDING
IN DC BASED THIS CURRENT PLAN
AND THE LOGIC IS VERY SIMPLE,
RIGHT?
IT DOESN'T MEAN THERE ARE
WONDERFUL THINGS IN THE UDC
THAT NEED TO MOVE FROM THE UDC
TO WHATEVER NEW ORDINANCE WE
HAVE.
I WOULD LOVE TO CALL IT THE
ZONING ORDINANCE NOW LIKE EVERY
OTHER COMMUNITY BUT IF WE'RE
GOING TO STICK WITH THE DC WE
CAN.
BUT THAT CONVERSION STARTING
FROM SCRATCH AND BUILDING UP AS
OPPOSED TO TRYING TO MODIFY AND
INCLUDES ACTIONS AND STUFF
MAKES THE OF A LOT OF SENSE TO
US AT THIS POINT.
>> WE LEAVE ROOM FOR THE
CONSULTANTS WHO ARE MAKING THE
PROPOSALS TO TELL US OTHERWISE
AND THERE ARE OTHERS WHO HAVE
TO MAKE THAT DECISION.
BUT INITIALLY WE THINK THAT'S
IT IS STAFF'S RECOMMENDATION AT
THIS POINT.
I HAVE A QUESTION ABOUT SHORT
TERM RENTALS THAT WASN'T ON MY
SLIDE.
>> WELL, SHORT TERM RENTAL
REGISTRATION'S I'M SORRY I
SHOULD HAVE ANNOUNCED YEAH.
>> SO IS IN TERMS
OF ENFORCEMENT OF SHORT TERM
RENTAL REGISTRATIONS OR AS A
FOR EXAMPLE IF SOMEBODY IF IT
IS BELIEVED THAT SOMEBODY IN A
RESIDENTIAL ZONE IS OPERATING A
SHORT TERM RENTAL THAT'S THEIR
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE, IS THAT
YOU OR IS THAT COMMUNITY
STANDARDS?
THAT'S US.
THAT'S OK.
IF SOMEONE IS IN VIOLATION IT
DOESN'T HAVE A REGISTRATION FOR
A SHORT TERM RENTAL.
WE MAY USE COMMUNITY STANDARDS
AND SOME OTHER GROUPS TO HELP
US.
WE'VE ALWAYS SAID THIS HERE
KNOWING THERE'S ONE THING
PROVING IT IS ANOTHER TO HELP
MAKE THAT ARGUMENT ONCE WE'VE
BEEN MADE AWARE OF IT SHORT
TERM RENTAL UNFORTUNATELY RIGHT
NOW WE'VE TALKED IN THE PAST IS
VERY, VERY REACTIVE.
WE DON'T HAVE ANYBODY OUT THERE
DOING IT PROACTIVELY FOR SOME
OF THE REASONS WE TALKED TO
UNTIL WE CAN INSPECT ALL THE
STRUCTURES AND DO THOSE TYPES
OF THINGS WE PRIORITIZE.
BUT IT IS AND DOES START WITH
US AND THEN ULTIMATELY THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF WRITING ANY
ENFORCEMENT TICKETS.
WE HAVE WRITTEN THOSE AND
PUSHED THOSE INTO THE TO THE
COURT CASE NOT AS MANY AS WE
WOULD LIKE BUT THE EGREGIOUS
VIOLATORS WERE ABLE TO TO TO
MOVE THEM ALONG.
OK, YEAH NO I AM YEAH.
FOR FOR MY PART I'D LIKE TO
EXPRESS SOME FEELING OF WANTING
TO BE ON THAT PROACTIVE
ENFORCEMENT.
>> YEAH WE ARE PROACTIVE WITH
GREAT THAT'S OUR GOAL ACROSS
THE BOARD IS TO BE PROACTIVE
GET TO WHERE WE'D LIKE TO BE
FOR THE CRUSTLESS ONE QUICK
ONE.
OH YOU TOUCHED UPON CAPITAL
CAPITAL PARKS.
YES EATIN' SOON WITHIN SIX
MONTHS PRESENTATIONS I'VE
ALREADY BEEN DRAFTED SOME HAVE
BEEN GIVEN AT LOWER SCALES.
IT'S NOT READY FOR PRIME TIME
HERE YET.
IT'S IMPRESSIVE.
I MEAN IT POINTS OUT WHAT WE
JUST TALKED ABOUT IT KNOWING
VERSUS PROVING IT IS PROVING
WHAT WE KNEW.
WE HAVE A VERY SIGNIFICANT LONG
TERM CAPITAL GAP FOR PARKS.
CAPITAL PROJECTS, YOU KNOW,
TENDS TO HUNDREDS MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS OVER THE NEXT 20
YEARS.
THERE WILL BE NEED TO BE A
COMBINATION OF THINGS PUT
TOGETHER TO ADDRESS THOSE
CAPITAL NEEDS ON A YEARLY BASIS
THERE IS GOING TO BE NO ONE
MAGIC BULLET I
THINK THAT'S
WHAT I KIND OF SAID HERE LAST
YEAR.
THE CAPITAL STUDY IS PROVING
THOSE ASSUMPTIONS WE THOUGHT WE
HAD LAST.
SO THE NUMBERS ARE GOOD.
THEY'RE GOING FACILITY BY
FACILITY, PIECE OF CAPITAL,
INFRASTRUCTURE BY PIECE
OF CAPITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
PUTTING A PRICE, PUTTING A
LIFESPAN ON IT AND THEN GIVING
US AN IDEA WHAT IT WOULD COST
TO REPLACE IN THIS THESE
DOLLARS TODAY'S DOLLARS AND
THEN WHAT THAT WILL LOOK LIKE
AS IT PROJECTS OUT.
SO IT'S GOING TO BE A IT IS A
VERY HELPFUL PIECE OF WORK AND
WE INTEND TO COME AND PRESENT A
THING IN TOTAL WHEN IT IS DONE
AND IT IS VERY CLOSE.
SO I WOULD SAY WITHIN THE NEXT
90 DAYS.
>> SO THANK YOU.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING, MAYOR CITY
COUNCIL.
I AM JENNIFER HALL, THE
DIRECTOR OF THE ANN ARBOR
HOUSING COMMISSION.
I AM HERE TO TALK ABOUT OUR
OPERATING BUDGET WHICH IS
ROUGHLY FORTY EIGHT MILLION
DOLLARS A YEAR OF THAT ROUGHLY
TWENTY EIGHT MILLION IS HUD
FUNDING WHICH TALK ABOUT A
LITTLE BIT LATER AND THE I WANT
TO TALK ABOUT WITH OUR
OPERATING BUDGET IT IS A
SEPARATE BUDGET THAN WHAT WE
CONSIDER TO BE OUR CAPITAL, OUR
DEVELOPMENT BUDGET.
HOWEVER, WHAT I NEED IS DUE TO
ANY SUCCESSES WE HAVE AT OUR
DEVELOPMENT SIDE.
SO ANY TIME WE DEVELOP A
PROPERTY THAT WE ARE GOING TO
OWN AND MANAGE WE ACTUALLY NEED
TO HAVE PEOPLE THERE TO COLLECT
RENT, LEASE IT UP, MARKET IT,
DO MAINTENANCE AND SO IN
ANTICIPATION OF FUTURE
DEVELOPMENTS IT WILL BE COMING
ONLINE IN THE NEXT TWO YEARS.
WE DO NEED TO HIRE SOME STAFF.
ANY STAFF THAT WE HIRE IS PAID
FOR FROM OUR OWN BUDGET, FROM
OUR RENT AND GRANTS THAT WE
SECURE.
BUT BECAUSE WE'RE CITY
EMPLOYEES, THE CITY DOES FRONT
THE GENERAL FUNDS TO PAY FOR
OUR STAFF AND THEN INVOICES US
TO PAY THEM BACK FOR THOSE
COSTS SO IT DOESN'T IMPACT THE
GENERAL FUND IN A LONG TERM
WAY.
IT'S A SHORT TERM WAY AND WE DO
END HIRING FOLKS ONCE WE ARE
READY TO SECURE THE FUNDS AND
HIRE THEM IN ADDITION TO THE
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT WE ARE
STARTING TO DO MORE
ADMINISTRATION OF DIFFERENT
GRANTS AND LOANS TO OTHER
DEVELOPERS WITH MILITARY FUNDS
AND WE HAVE OUR COMMUNITY
CENTER DUMBA TOWER WILL BE
COMING ONLINE IN THE SUMMER
OF TWENTY TWENTY SIX AND WE'LL
NEED A MANAGER TO MANAGE THAT.
I'M ALSO ASKING FOR A INCREASE
IN THE PAY FOR OUR HOUSING AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
THAT WE HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO
HIRE SOMEBODY FULL TIME DUE TO
NEEDING REALLY A PAY INCREASE
TO ATTRACT FOLKS THAT ARE
QUALIFIED TO DO THAT POSITION.
SO I'VE GOT THE FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY SIX AND TWENTY SEVEN
BOTH EXPENDITURES AND ON BOTH
SIDES IT'S NEW REVENUE BOTH
THOSE WHAT PROJECTS ARE
SCHEDULED TO BE COMPLETED THAT
ARE FUNDED BY THE MILLAGE
DENVER TOWER WILL BE WE WILL BE
LEASING UP STARTING IN FEBRUARY
OF TWENTY TWENTY SIX AVALON'S
VIRIDIAN GROBART VIRIDIAN THEY
WILL BE LEASING UP THIS SUMMER
AND THE ANNEX GROUP WE ACTUALLY
PROVIDED A THREE MILLION DOLLAR
LOAN TO THE ANNEX GROUP FOR THE
UNION AT R-SQUARED AND THEY
WILL BE STARTING TO LEASE NEXT
JUNE.
>> THE LAST ITEM I'M GOING TO
TALK ABOUT IS HORIZON ISSUES.
I HAVE NO IDEA.
I MEAN YOUR GUESS IS AS GOOD AS
MINE.
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN AT THE
FEDERAL LEVEL?
I CAN TELL YOU WHAT WE'VE SEEN
HAPPENING AND WHAT WE
ANTICIPATE HAPPENING.
I WAS VERY SURPRISED THAT OUR
RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR OUR
TENANT BASED AND PROJECT BASED
RENTAL ASSISTANCE NOT ONLY
STAYED LEVEL BUT WE ACTUALLY
ARE SEEING AN INCREASE IN THE
CONTINUING RESOLUTION.
DO I KNOW WHETHER THAT WILL
HAPPEN IN THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR?
I DO NOT.
SO WE'RE BEING VERY
CONSERVATIVE IN PULLING PEOPLE
FOR WAIT LISTS AND LEASING NEW
PEOPLE UP BECAUSE IF OUR BUDGET
GETS CUT THE LAST PERSON WHO
LEASED UP IS THE FIRST PERSON
TO LOSE THEIR VOUCHER AND WE DO
NOT WANT TO HAVE PEOPLE WHO ARE
SIX MONTHS INTO THEIR LEASE AND
THEN SUDDENLY LOSE THEIR RENT
SUBSIDY.
WE HAVE HEARD AND YOU'VE
PROBABLY SEEN THAT ABOUT HALF
OF THE HUD BUDGET SORRY STAFF
IN THE DETROIT OFFICE IS GOING
TO BE CUT AND WE HAVE HEARD WE
DON'T KNOW FOR SURE THAT THE
HUD OFFICE WILL PROBABLY MOVE
TO CHICAGO.
I DON'T HAVE ANY CONTROL OVER
THAT.
DO NOT KNOW WHAT THE IMPACT
WILL BE AND THERE ARE HAVE BEEN
SOME CUTS IN THE BUDGET BUT NOT
THE AREAS THAT WE WORK WITH THE
MOST SIGNIFICANTLY CONCERNED
THOUGH ABOUT ANY IMPACTS TO OUR
RESIDENTS, LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS, WHETHER THAT'S
PEOPLE WHO ARE VETERANS,
WHETHER THOSE PEOPLE HAVE
SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY OR
SOCIAL SECURITY INCOME.
THE SCHOOLS IN THE SPECIAL
EDUCATION PROGRAMS THAT CAN
HAVE A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON
OUR FAMILIES.
IT CAN IMPACT BOTH THEIR INCOME
AND SO HOW MUCH RENT THEY PAY.
SO IF THEY PAY LESS RENT THEN
WE NEED MORE RENT SUBSIDY FROM
HUD.
IT ALSO CAN IMPACT VARIOUS
FAMILY DYNAMICS AND ISSUES THAT
COULD REQUIRE MORE SERVICES.
BUT AGAIN I DO NOT KNOW WHAT
EXACTLY THAT IMPACT WILL BE.
THE BIGGEST IMPACT WE ARE
SEEING RIGHT NOW IS IN THE
DEVELOPMENT IN THE MARKETPLACE
FOR DEVELOPMENT.
SO WE'RE ALREADY SEEING WITH
THE TARIFF THE THREATS
OF TERRORISTS AND ACTUAL
TERRORISTS.
WE ARE SEEING CHANGES IN THE
COST OF MATERIALS AND
AVAILABILITY.
BUT IT'S BEEN LIKE THAT FOR
SEVERAL YEARS SINCE COVID BUT
IT'S GETTING WORSE THEN THERE'S
JUST THE FINANCIAL MARKET.
WE JUST DON'T KNOW WHERE
INTEREST RATES ARE GOING.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT'S HAPPENING
WITH OUR EQUITY MARKETS FOR OUR
TAX CREDITS AND WE DON'T KNOW
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN WITH WE
HAVE SEVERAL PROJECTS THAT WE
SHOULD BE GETTING IREY CREDITS
THAT WE INSTALLED SOLAR.
THIS IS OUR FIRST YEAR THAT
WE'RE SUBMITTING THAT FOR
REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE IRS.
HOPEFULLY IT ALL GOES THROUGH
BUT WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT
LOOKS LIKE IN THE FUTURE AND
WE'VE GOT CONTRACTS UNDERWAY.
SO IF WE DON'T GET THOSE
CREDITS FROM THE IRS THROUGH
THE PROGRAM WE WILL HAVE TO
BACK FILL THEM WITH OTHER
FUNDING SOURCES.
>> MY BIGGEST CONCERN PROBABLY
ALSO UNPREDICTABLE IS HOW MANY
EVICTIONS THERE WILL BE IN THE
COMMUNITY DUE TO PEOPLE WHO
HAVE JOB LOSSES AND THE IMPACT
THROUGH DIFFERENT TYPES
OF ECONOMY.
>> I DO WANT TO POINT OUT
BECAUSE MOST PEOPLE DON'T
REALLY THINK ABOUT THIS WE
RECEIVED TWENTY EIGHT MILLION
DOLLARS A YEAR FROM HUD ABOUT
TWENTY SIX MILLION IS RENT
SUBSIDIES AND IT'S NOT JUST FOR
OUR OWN PROPERTIES.
IT'S NOT JUST FOR AVALON
PROPERTIES.
IT'S FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
AND SO THOSE RENT SUBSIDIES ARE
PAYING A LOT TO PRIVATE
LANDLORDS IN THE COMMUNITY AND
SO IF THERE'S A SIGNIFICANT
LOSS IN RENT FUNDING FOR OUR
TENANTS THEN THAT IS A RENT
LOSS ALSO TO OUR OUR LOCAL
LANDLORDS, SOME OF WHOM ARE
THEY OWN A SINGLE FAMILY HOME.
THEY ARE MACKINLEY.
SO A WIDE RANGE OF LANDLORDS.
AND THEN THE LAST THING I WANT
TO SAY IS THAT WE ARE DOING A
FOLLOW UP TO THE FILM THAT WE
BROUGHT INTO TOWN FOR THE
BEYOND THE BRIDGE WE ARE
ACTUALLY DOING.
WE HAD ALREADY PLANNED ON DOING
A LOCAL FILM IS OUR THIRD FILM
WORKING WITH BRACO WHO DID A
LETTER TO THE WEST SIDE.
>> SO WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A
FILM THAT GOES THROUGH AND
SHOWS PEOPLE HOW OUR LOCAL
HOMELESS RESPONSE SYSTEM WORKS,
WHAT IS WORKING, WHAT ISN'T
WORKING AND WHAT WE CAN DO
ABOUT IT.
SO JUST A HEADS UP ON THAT.
>> THAT'S IT.
AND IS THERE ANY QUESTIONS?
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH
.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JORDAN ROBERTS, THE NEW
PUBLIC SERVICES AREA
ADMINISTRATOR.
I BELIEVE I'VE MET ALL OF YOU
IF NOT, YEAH.
>> ANYWAY, WE'LL GET STARTED.
>> NICE LITTLE PICTURES HERE
OF ALL THE DIFFERENT THINGS WE
HAVE GOING ON HERE TODAY.
GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE ASKS
FROM PUBLIC SERVICES AND ASKS
KIND OF FOCUS AROUND FOR
PRIORITIES WITHIN PUBLIC
SERVICES.
WE WANT TO GAIN A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT ARE OUR
CURRENT INFRASTRUCTURE OR NEEDS
ARE WHILE WE'RE DOING THAT WE
NEED TO BE PLANNING FOR WHAT
OUR FUTURE INFRASTRUCTURE
DEMANDS ARE GOING TO BE,
ESPECIALLY WITH THE DEVELOPMENT
AND GROWTH.
AND THEN WE ALSO WANT TO
MAINTAIN AND OPTIMIZE OUR OUR
SERVICES AND ALIGN WITH THE
GOALS WITHIN THE CITY
TRANSPORTATION AND SUSTAINABLE
THE GOALS.
THESE ARE THINGS THE RANGE
OF THINGS THAT WE'RE LOOKING
FOR ARE WE'RE DOING WATER MAIN
CONDITION ASSESSMENTS,
INUNDATION MAP ANALYSIS.
WE'RE DOING SANITARY CAPACITY
ANALYSIS TO FIND OUT WHAT DO WE
HAVE NOW, WHAT CAN WE BUILD AND
WHAT ARE WE HOPING TO DO IN THE
FUTURE.
THE FIRST CATEGORY THAT WE LIKE
WE'RE WE'RE INVOLVED WITH IS
THE FEDERAL MANDATES FOR THE
SUPERIOR AND BARTON DAMS.
THESE ARE GOING TO BE SECURITY
IMPROVEMENTS AND REPAIRS.
THESE HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED IN
THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
BUT THEY'RE GOING TO ALLOW US
TO STUDY AND PRIORITIZE THE
MAINTENANCE NEEDS FOR THESE
DAMS AND THEN AND AS WHILE
DOING THAT WE'LL BE ABLE TO
MAKE OUR CONCRETE REPAIRS.
WE HAVE AN AIR SHAFT THAT NEEDS
TO BE REHABILITATED AND
CONTINUING THE EMBANKMENT
PROJECT THAT YOU'RE ALL
PROBABLY AWARE
, IT'S ALSO GOING
TO ADDRESS SECURITY AND SAFETY
ISSUES
JUST FROM PEOPLE BEING
BEING AROUND THERE AND ALSO
IT'S A DAM SO WE WANT TO KEEP
IT SECURE FOR UTILITY
INFRASTRUCTURE.
I SPLIT IT UP INTO TWO
CATEGORIES WE HAVE ASSESSMENTS
AND PLANNING AND THEN CRITICAL
SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
ARE ASSESSMENTS AND PLANNING IS
FOCUSING A LOT ON SANITARY
MODELING, STORM WATER AND
SANITARY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
WHAT OUR CAPACITY IS.
SO WHEN WE BUILD SOMETHING OR
WHEN SOMEBODY COMES IN TO BUILD
A NEW ONE HUNDRED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT, HOW DO WE HAVE THE
CAPACITY IN OUR SEWERS TO
HANDLE ALL THOSE FLUSHING
TOILETS?
RIGHT.
DO WE HAVE THE CAPACITY IN OUR
WATER SYSTEM TO SUPPORT ALL THE
WATER THEY'RE GOING TO BE
DRAWING?
THAT'S ALSO PART OF THE WATER
MAIN CONDITION FOR WE'RE HAVING
AN ASSESSED LOOKING FOR WHERE
WE CAN MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO
PROACTIVELY ADDRESS THE AGING
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE ALSO HAVE WE'RE LOOKING INTO
SOME WATER DISTRIBUTION AND
SOURCING MODELS.
WE WANT TO PROTECT OUR RAW
WATER SOURCES.
WE USE SURFACE WATER AND GROUND
WATER AND ONE OF THE STUDIES
WE'RE LOOKING AT IS HOW CAN WE
MAXIMIZE THE WELL FIELD SO WE
CAN DRAW MORE WATER OUT
OF THAT.
THINK OF IT AS HOW DO WE HOW DO
WE EITHER MAKE THE STRAW GO
DEEPER OR PUT MORE STRAWS IN
AND BECAUSE WE WANT TO BE ABLE
TO BE SECURE AND NOT RELY
ALMOST SOLELY ON THE ON THE
HURON RIVER.
ANOTHER THING OBVIOUSLY IS WITH
GRAVEL ROADS DRAINAGE THIS IS
AN ONGOING STUDY THAT WE'RE
WORKING ON TO HELP WITH WATER
ISSUES IN THOSE NEIGHBORHOOD
WATER MANAGEMENT ISSUES IN
THOSE NEIGHBORHOODS FOR THE
CRITICAL MAINTENANCE.
THIS IS A LOT OF OUR AGING
INFRASTRUCTURE AT PLANT THAT
OUR WASTEWATER WATER RESOURCE
RECOVERY FACILITY AND OUR WATER
TREATMENT PLANT AS WELL AS A
LOT OF UNDERGROUND STUFF.
THIS IS PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE.
ONE OF THE REQUESTS FOR
ELECTRICAL PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE WHERE WE HAVE
PEOPLE GO IN AND FIND ALL THE
NEAR FAILING ELECTRICAL REQUIRE
ELECTRICAL NEEDS THAT ALLOWS US
TO GET ON TOP OF IT AND FIX IT
BEFORE IT IS A FAILURE BEFORE
WE HAVE ANY SORT
OF CATASTROPHIC FAILURES OR
INTERRUPTIONS IN SERVICE.
AND THEN WE ALSO ARE ASKING TO
REPLACE A NUMBER OF PUMPS,
VALVES, PIPES.
WE HAVE A FILTER PROCESS THAT
NEEDS TO BE REPLACED.
WE'RE PLACING GROUND VALVES
THAT I BELIEVE WE STARTED IN
THIS YEAR AND WE WANT TO
CONTINUE THAT EFFORT NEXT SORT
OF LUMP CATEGORY FOR OUR
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY.
WE'VE WE'VE GOT ONGOING WE'RE
STARTING TO LARGE
TRANSPORTATION STUDIES THE
NORTH MAIN TRANSPORTATION STUDY
IS LETTING US LOOK AT MAIN
STREET TO TRY TO COLLABORATE
WITH AMD ON ON HOW WE CAN WORK
TOGETHER AND LOOK TO SEE IF WE
CAN INCREASE THE ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION ALONG THERE AND
AS WELL AS A MULTI LANE ROAD
RECONFIGURATION.
>> WE WANT TO LOOK AT THE
FEASIBILITY OF INCREASING
ALTERNATE TYPES OF MOBILITY
ALONG OUR MAIN TRANSIT
CORRIDORS AND THEN WE'RE ALSO
DOING SIGN REPLACEMENTS ON
LOCAL STREETS.
THIS IS GOING TO CREATE RETRO
REFLECTIVE WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
INSTALL SIGNS WITH RETRO
REFLECTIVITY.
I LEARNED THAT WORD AND I LOVE
IT AND BASICALLY IT'S JUST THE
SIGNS THAT YOU'D SEE ON
HIGHWAYS THAT THE LIGHT IS
PROJECTED BACK TO THE DRIVER'S
.
YOU CAN CLEARLY READ THE SIGNS
WE'RE GOING TO START WE'VE
STARTED REVIEWING AND WANT TO
BEGIN INSTALLING THE SIGNS ON
OUR LOCAL STREETS.
WE'RE ALSO ASKING FOR A FORD
LIGHTNINGS SUPPORT OUR BIKE
LANE MAINTENANCE INSTEAD OF THE
DIESEL DUMP TRUCK THAT WE USE
RIGHT NOW AND WE'RE ALSO
LOOKING FOR ROAD CUTS JUST DUE
TO LACK OF CAPACITY.
WE'RE NOT ABLE TO KEEP UP WITH
THE AMOUNT OF ROAD CUTS THAT
HAPPEN FOR OUR DAMAGE FOR A
FALLING TREE, FOR NEEDING A YOU
KNOW, TO GET TO A WATER MAIN.
WE CAN PATCH THEM.
BUT IF WE WANT TO DO A MUCH
NICER REPLACEMENT, SOME
ADDITIONAL FUNDING TO HELP
BRING SERVICES IN TO COVER THAT
FOR US IS IDEAL.
WE ALSO WANT TO WORK ON
DELIVERING OUR HIGH QUALITY
SERVICES THAT OUR RESIDENTS
EXPECT.
IT'S THE FOCUS IS GOING TO BE
ON ENHANCING OUR WATER AND AIR
QUALITY THROUGH EQUIPMENT,
EQUIPMENT UPGRADES.
SO FOR INSTANCE THIS WILL BE
HEADWORKS CARBON AT THE WATER
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY TO
IMPROVE AIR QUALITY AND IT'S
GOING TO BE LAB EQUIPMENT
THAT'S GOING IN THE WATER
TREATMENT TO HELP US MONITOR
WATER QUALITY REAL TIME AND
ALLOW US TO MAKE ADJUSTMENTS AS
NEEDED.
>> WE'RE ALSO LOOKING TO
DEVELOP SOLID WASTE GOALS AND
OPPORTUNITIES THROUGH A
SERVICES STUDY THROUGH
UNDERSTANDING WHAT OUR
RESIDENTS ARE DISPOSING OF AND
LOOKING FOR LOOKING FOR
OPPORTUNITIES TO DIVERT FROM
THE LANDFILL.
ONE OF THE PROGRAMS THAT WE'RE
USING THERE IS THERE IT'S MOVE
OUT IN ARBOR.
IT'S RECENTLY STARTED WHERE
WE'RE USING SINCE WE HAVE
STUDENT MOVE OUT IN MAY THERE'S
A LOT OF FURNITURE THAT HAS
BEEN LIGHTLY USED FOR NINE
MONTHS AND OUR SOLID WASTE UNIT
IT HAS BEEN COORDINATING DROP
OFF SITES AND PICKUPS WITH
LOCAL COMMUNITY GROUPS THAT USE
THAT USE THIS THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO FILL HOMES FOR YOU KNOW, I
THINK HABITAT FOR HUMANITY
THERE WAS ONE THEY HAD THAT WAS
THE NAME ESCAPES ME BUT THESE
THESE HELP FURNISH APARTMENTS
HOMES FOR PEOPLE THAT OTHERWISE
WOULDN'T HAVE ACCESS TO THIS
QUALITY FURNITURE.
WE ALSO WANT TO WORK ON THE
RELIABLE SYSTEM MONITORING THE
IF YOU'VE NEVER BEEN TO OUR
WATER TREATMENT PLANT THAT
SCREEN BEHIND ON THE PHOTO
THERE ISN'T OUR WATER TREATMENT
BUT I'VE BEEN THERE AND IT
LOOKS JUST LIKE THAT THIS IS
WHAT IS REQUIRED TO TO MAINTAIN
THE WATER QUALITY TO MAKE SURE
WE ARE MEETING ALL FEDERAL
GUIDELINES AND HOW WE KEEP OUR
WATER CLEAN.
AND THIS IS ALL THAT'S ALL THE
SUPPORT THE SERVICES WE GIVE
AND TO MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN
CONTINUE TO DO THIS PART HERE
IN WHERE WE'RE LOOKING AT SOME
50S AND SOME VEHICLES THE 50S
ARE ASKED I DON'T NONE OF THEM
ARE OUT OF THE GENERAL FUND.
THEY'RE ALL OUT OF THEIR
RELATIVE FUNDS.
THE SOLID WASTE SUPERVISOR WE
CURRENTLY ONLY HAVE ONE FOR THE
ENTIRE SOLID WASTE UNIT AND
THAT UNIT WORKS.
THEY START AS EARLY AS FIVE
A.M. THEY MAY BE WORKING 12
HOUR DAYS AND SIX DAYS A WEEK.
THAT SUPERVISOR IS IS IT NEEDS
HELP.
THERE'S A LOT OF A LOT OF TIMES
THAT SUPERVISOR HAS TO BECOME
AN OPERATOR WHEN SOMEBODY IS
OUT AND SO THIS WOULD ENABLE
SOME REDUNDANCY AND ALLOW THE
HOUSE NOT TO NEED ONE
SUPERVISOR ONLY HAVE ONE
SUPERVISOR.
THERE'S OTHER YOU KNOW, SOAPIES
THAT CAN BE DRAWN UP.
OTHER SUPERVISOR WORK THAT THAT
CAN BE HANDLED.
THE COMPOST COORDINATORS ALSO
WITH SOLID WASTE.
THIS IS GOING TO BE WITH
PARTNERING WITH OSSI FROM THE
CLIMATE ACTION AND THIS IS
GOING TO BE EXPANDING COMPOST
COLLECTION TO MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING THAT WILL THAT WILL
INCREASE OUR REACH THERE.
AND THIS PERSON IS ALSO GOING
TO BE DOING OUTREACH AND
EDUCATION FOR COMPOST
COLLECTION AND AND LOOKING AT
THAT EXPANDING THAT PROGRAM THE
FORESTRY OUTREACH IS CURRENTLY
DONE BY AN INTERN.
IT'S BEEN DONE FOR A NUMBER
OF YEARS BY AN INTERN BUT THE
BY MAKING IT A FULL TIME
POSITION WE ARE TRYING TO TAKE
OVER THE CITIES PRUNER PROGRAM
FROM KNAP AND ALLOW THEM SO WE
WOULD TAKE THAT AND THEN THEY
CAN WORK ON TREE PLANTING THIS
PERSON WOULD ALSO BE ABLE TO
MANAGE ALL SORTS OF TREE
PROGRAMS.
ELIZABETH DEAN FUN PROJECTS AND
BY NOT BY HAVING EXTRA TIME TO
INVESTIGATE THE CITIZEN
REQUESTS AND COMPLAINTS THAT
COME THROUGH ASKING ABOUT TREE
TRIMMING OR DANGEROUS TREES.
WE WILL HAVE SOMEBODY THAT CAN
FOLLOW UP ON THAT IN THE WATER
UTILITY SUPERVISOR WE DO HAVE
FOUR BUT WE NEED A FIFTH ONE
THE FOUR WATER UTILITY
SUPERVISORS AT THE WATER
TREATMENT PLANT IS A TWENTY
FOUR HOUR OPERATION AND THE
WATER UTILITY THE CURRENTLY
THEY'VE ALREADY CLOCKED A
THOUSAND HOURS OF OVERTIME LAST
YEAR AND WE HAVE FOUR HUNDRED
HOURS OF DEFERRED SUPERVISORY
WORK THAT BECAUSE THEY WERE
THEY WERE COVERING OR OR THE
ONLY PERSON THERE THEY WERE
UNABLE TO DO SOME SOME EXTRA
WORK THAT SUPERVISORS USUALLY
DO AND THEN THIS SITE
COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR THAT WE
ARE SHARING WITH COMMUNITY
SERVICES HAS BEEN EXPLAINED
THAT'S GOING TO BE HELPING TO
USHER THEM THROUGH THE THE
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS FOR
VEHICLES THEIR WE ARE A HEAVY
USER OF VEHICLES.
WE USE A LOT OF HEAVY EQUIPMENT
AND WE HAVE A LOT OF TRUCKS.
THE AMOUNT HERE
THE VEHICLES
THAT WERE DUE FOR REPLACEMENT
BY FLEET THAT IS WHAT IS THE
SHORTAGE IN WHAT WAS AVAILABLE.
AND THEN WE'RE ALSO ASKING FOR
ANOTHER FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND
FOR VEHICLE ADDITIONS OR
UPGRADES.
BUT THESE ARE THINGS LIKE THE
EV FOR BIKE LANE MAINTENANCE.
ONE OF THEM IS A FLAIL ARM
MOWER AND THIS IS GOING TO BE
THAT PIECE OF EQUIPMENT WOULD
BE ABLE TO PAY FOR ITSELF AFTER
TWO OR THREE YEARS.
WE CURRENTLY USE A CONTRACTOR
TO MAINTAIN SOME ROADSIDES
ALONG FENCE'S HARDER TO REACH
AREAS IF WE REMOVE THE CONTRACT
BECAUSE WE BOUGHT OUR OWN FLAIL
ARM MOWER WE WOULD BE ABLE TO
PAY THAT OFF IN SAVINGS RATHER
THAN HAVING AN ANNUAL CONTRACT
FEE AND PARKS CAN ALSO USE THIS
MOWER TO FOR AREAS THAT THEY
HAVE THAT THEY NEED.
IT'S A PRETTY COOL PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT.
IT'S GOT A WHOLE BIG LAWN MOWER
BLADE ON A PARTICULAR ARM AND
THE LAST ON THERE ARE THESE
BODY TRUCKS.
THESE ARE THESE ARE THEY LOOK
VERY SIMILAR TO THE USUAL DPW
TRUCK WITH WITH A SALT BOX OR
WHATEVER.
BUT WERE THEY ARE ENABLED TO
TAKE THOSE OFF AND SWAP OUT FOR
DIFFERENT USES.
>> SO YOU MAY NEED A CLOTH OR A
TREE TRUCK.
YOU MAY NEED A DUMPSTER THAT
YOU CAN DROP OFF AT A
COLLECTION POINT AND IT IS
LITERALLY LIKE A ROLL OFF
DUMPSTER.
IT CAN BE A SALT BOX AND FLEET
HAS SAID THAT WHEN WE WITH
THESE TRUCKS WE CAN ACTUALLY
EXTEND THE LIFE OF A TRUCK
BECAUSE IT'S NOT EITHER JUST
BEING USED FOR ONE USE AND THEN
SITTING OR IT'S NOT JUST BEING
PUT THROUGH THE SAME TYPE
OF WORK ALL THE TIME ALLOWS
THEM TO EXTEND THE THE LIFE
OF THE TRUCK THEN FOR HORIZON
SHOES HERE I BELIEVE YOU MAY BE
AWARE OF THIS ONE THE WATER
TREATMENT PLANT ONE IS OF VERY
OLD.
IT WILL NEED TO BE REPLACED AND
BROUGHT.
WE ARE GETTING WE JUST HAD A
NEW CONSULTING WORK WITH THE ON
THE PILOT PLANT THAT WE HAVE
AND IMMEDIATELY WE'RE ALREADY
GETTING GOOD NUMBERS FROM THEM
THAT WE WERE NOT GETTING FROM
BEFORE SO WE'RE VERY HAPPY
ABOUT THAT AND SO THAT'S THAT'S
A GOOD STEP IN THE DIRECTION.
HOWEVER, IT'S GOING TO BE A
COSTLY REPLACEMENT.
IT IS A WATER TREATMENT PLANT
AND THAT IS SOMETHING THAT I
KNOW HAS BEEN GOING ON BEFORE I
GOT HERE AND I HOPE TO SEE
THROUGH TO THE END THE SECOND
ONE IS GOING TO BE INCREASING
DEMANDS ON INFRASTRUCTURE
SERVICES.
THAT'S KIND OF PART OF THE
CIRCLING BACK TO THE PRIORITIES
I BROUGHT WHICH IS AS WE'RE
DEVELOPING MORE WE'RE HAVING
MORE AND MORE DEMAND ON OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE.
THE PICTURE ON THERE YOU CAN
SEE IS JUST A SCREENSHOT FROM I
BELIEVE THIS IS A SANITARY AND
JUST SHOWING THAT IF IF A
DEVELOPMENT WERE BUILT ON THIS
LINE IT WOULD BE AT 90 PERCENT
CAPACITY.
SO IF WE WERE TO BUILD ANOTHER
ONE, WHAT HAPPENS?
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE
NEED TO BE MINDFUL OF THAT
WE'RE PLANNING FOR AS WE DO THE
STUDIES AND INVESTIGATE AND
ASSESSMENTS THE OTHER THE LAST
HORIZON ISSUE HERE IS IS FOR
DAM REHABILITATION OR
DECOMMISSIONING.
WE DO HAVE TWO HYDROELECTRIC
DAMS, ONE OF THOSE DAMS IS
CURRENTLY NOT OPERATING AS A
HYDRO ELECTRIC.
IT IS JUST A DAM.
BUT BECAUSE OF THAT IT'S STILL
SUBJECT TO FURCH MANDATES FOR
THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY
REGULATORY NON-EMERGENCY
FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY
COMMISSION AND WE NEED TO THE
DECISION IS GOING TO NEED TO BE
MADE ABOUT WHETHER WE WANT TO
REHABILITATE A DAM TO PRODUCE
HYDROELECTRIC POWER AT A SMALL
AMOUNT THAT MAY NEVER REPAY
WHAT IT COSTS TO REBUILD OR
DECOMMISSION IT AND REMOVE THE
HYDRO ELECTRIC PART.
IT BECOMES JUST A REGULAR DAM
AND IS NO LONGER SUBJECT TO
REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO THOSE
DAMS IS THE DIKES BOROUGHBRIDGE
THIS IS A ONE A BRIDGE THAT
SERVES A PURPOSE FOR US TO GET
TO THE DAM.
>> I THINK IT'S BARTON DAM THE
DAM.
>> YEAH WHERE IT'S THE ONLY
ACCESS WE HAVE TO GET TO THE
DAM.
HOWEVER THE BRIDGE IS NEEDING
REPAIR AND WE DO NOT OWN THE
BRIDGE SO IT IS AN ISSUE WITH
THE CITY AND THE COUNTY TO FIND
OUT HOW THIS IS GOING TO BE
DONE AND WE NEED TO DO THAT
SOONER RATHER THAN LATER.
OTHER THAN THAT I HAVE ANYONE
HAS ANY QUESTIONS ANSWERED.
THANK YOU FOR THIS PRESENTATION
.
REALLY HAPPY TO HEAR I'M NOT
READY TO LEAVE.
I'M JUST GLAD I UNDERSTAND I'M
REALLY HAPPY TO HEAR ABOUT THE
COMPOST COORDINATOR.
I THINK IT'S GREAT.
I THINK THE MORE THAT YOU ALL
CAN DO TO COORDINATE WITH OUR
SITE THE MORE WE CAN DO
ESPECIALLY AROUND THE CIRCULAR
ECONOMY TO MOVE THAT FORWARD.
I WANTED TO KNOW WHAT THE
POSSIBILITY IS THAT THE
SANITARY SEWER CAPACITY COMPLEX
LAND WOULD BE READY SOONER THAN
LATER SO THAT IT CAN HELP
INFORM THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN AND ITS DECISIONS
ABOUT WHERE TO PRIORITIZE
DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE IT DOESN'T
MAKE SENSE AS WE IMPLEMENT THAT
PLAN WE NEED TO IMPLEMENT IT
CONSISTENT WITH WHERE WE HAVE
CAPACITY AND PRIORITIZE THOSE
AREAS WHERE WE CAN ADD
RESIDENTIAL OPPORTUNITY WHERE
WE HAVE SANITARY SEWER
CAPACITY.
SO WHAT'S THE POSSIBILITY
OF COORDINATING GETTING THAT
INVOLVED?
I MEAN I'M I'M VERY INTERESTED
IN COORDINATING SPECIFICALLY
FOR THE TIMELINE.
I WOULD NEED TO GO BACK AND ASK
STAFF THAT AND I CAN CERTAINLY
CIRCLE BACK WITH YOU FOR THAT.
BUT I THINK THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION.
I WAS REALLY EXCITED TO HEAR
ABOUT THE I CAN'T BELIEVE I'M
GOING TO SAY THIS THE GRAVEL
ROADS DRAINAGE STUDY THAT'S A
BIG DEAL IN WARD FIVE.
SO I'M REALLY I'M SURE THE
RESIDENTS IN THAT PART OF TOWN
WILL BE REALLY HAPPY AND THEN
OBVIOUSLY WITH THE RECENT WATER
MAIN BREAK THAT AFFECTED THE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS, THAT'S ANOTHER
THING I THINK IS REALLY
EXCITING ABOUT YOUR PROPOSAL.
I I GUESS I HAVE A SORT OF I
GUESS A FOLLOW UP QUESTION TO
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH WHICH WAS
ON THE CAPACITY ASSESSMENT WHAT
ASSUMPTIONS ARE BEING MADE
AROUND THE FUTURE GROWTH
OF RESIDENTS AND SORT OF HOW
ARE YOU FORECASTING THAT OUT?
I WILL HAVE TO TALK TO STAFF ON
THAT.
I APOLOGIZE JUST WITH THE SHORT
TIME I HAVEN'T GOT THOSE KIND
OF DETAILS BUT I DO KNOW THAT
THEY ARE IT'S THE ANALYSIS THAT
THEY'RE THEY'RE DOING NOW IS IS
IN DEPTH.
I THINK IT'S DONE BY TROY
BAPHOMET I BELIEVE IS OUR OUR
EXCELLENT AT THAT.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY WE DON'T HAVE
THAT ANSWER.
BUT I AM HAPPY TO CIRCLE BACK
TO YOU FOR THAT ONE.
>> NO NO NEED TO APOLOGIZE.
IT'S ONLY BEEN HERE A COUPLE
OF WEEKS.
THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
COUNCIL MAYOR.
FULL DISCLOSURE I GOT HERE WHEN
JORDAN DID SO FOR QUESTIONS.
I AM HERE STANDING IN FOR FOR
MONICA TONIGHT.
I WANTED TO TO KIND OF TOUCH
BASE ON A COUPLE OF REQUESTS.
SOME ASKS THAT WE HAVE THIS
YOU'RE DIRECTED TOWARDS OUR
MOST VALUABLE ASSET OUR
EMPLOYEES.
THE FIRST ASK THAT I WANT TO
TALK ABOUT IS A PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM WE'RE LOOKING
AT.
WE CURRENTLY LACK A
STANDARDIZED EFFECTIVE SYSTEM
FOR EVALUATING EMPLOYEE
PERFORMANCE, PROVIDING FEEDBACK
AND ALIGNING INDIVIDUAL GOALS
WITH ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
.
ORGANIZATIONAL WIDE.
WE'RE LOOKING TO IMPLEMENT A
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
THAT THAT CAN HELP US ALIGN.
>> I'M SORRY I'M NERVOUS.
IT FACILITATES PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT BY IDENTIFYING
STRENGTHS AND AREAS FOR
IMPROVEMENT SUPPORTING
SUCCESSION PLANNING.
IT'S GOING TO ENHANCE
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
SUPERVISORS EMPLOYEES AND IT
DRIVES INCREASED EMPLOYEE
PRODUCTIVITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
OUR SECOND TASK IS ABOUT
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT.
SO WE'RE LOOKING TO ASK FOR FOR
SOME MONEY TO DO A NEEDS
ASSESSMENT IN FY TWENTY SIX
THAT ALLOWS US TO DO AN
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT SURVEY TO
ESTABLISH BASELINES AND
IDENTIFY SOME KEY DRIVERS
OF ENGAGEMENT SPECIFIC TO OUR
WORKFORCE AND DESIGN SOME
TARGETED INITIATIVES THAT WILL
FOLLOW UP WITH AS WE GET THOSE
DESIGNED TO TRY TO BOOST
EMPLOYEE MORALE COMMITMENT WE
CAN IT LEADS TO HIGH RETENTION
RATES.
IT REDUCES TURNOVER COSTS THAT
WE HAVE IN POSITIONS, FOSTERS A
POSITIVE WORK ENVIRONMENT,
IMPROVES EMPLOYEE MORALE AND
OVERALL JOB SATISFACTION.
REALLY IT TRANSLATES TO BETTER
SERVICE IN A MORE POSITIVE
EXPERIENCE TO TO CITY TO THE
PEOPLE THAT WE PROVIDE SERVICES
TO.
I WANTED TO TALK ABOUT A COUPLE
OF HORIZON ISSUES.
MY BRIEF IS GOING A LOT FASTER
THAN EVERYBODY ELSE'S.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
ARE SEEING
ACROSS THE CITY
WORKFORCE IS THAT WE'RE HIRING
A NUMBER POSITIONS THAT THAT
REQUIRE MORE MONEY ESSENTIALLY
TO BE MORE COMPETITIVE.
RIGHT.
SO WE'RE HIRING POSITIONS IN
THE PRIVATE SECTOR ARE WE JUST
CAN'T COMPETE WITH THE IN IN
THE THE CIVILIAN SECTOR.
>> SO OUR FOCUS IS ON ENHANCING
OUR COMPETITIVE COMPENSATION,
THE BRAND UTILIZING INNOVATION
RECRUITMENT TECHNOLOGIES AND
TRYING TO FOSTER WORKPLACE
CULTURE SO THAT WE CAN OVERCOME
THAT.
YOU KNOW, WITH MANAGING
EMPLOYEE WELL-BEING AND WORK
ENVIRONMENT WE'RE STILL
RECOVERING FROM COVID AS SOME
PEOPLE ALLUDED TO TODAY.
WE'RE STILL WE'RE STILL COMING
OUT OF THAT.
SO EMPLOYEE MORALE BEING IN THE
HYBRID WORK ENVIRONMENT NOW WE
HAVE A LOT OF POLITICAL
UNCERTAINTY SO IT'S MAKING SURE
THAT WE'RE PAYING ATTENTION TO
THE PULSE, THE CULTURE OF OUR
EMPLOYEES AND MAKING SURE THAT
WE'RE PAYING ATTENTION TO WHAT
THEY NEED TO HAVE A POSITIVE
WORK ENVIRONMENT NAVIGATING
POTENTIAL FEDERAL FUNDING CUTS
.
WE'VE ALL TALKED ABOUT THAT
TONIGHT HERE.
THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS THAT
CAN HAPPEN WITH WITH THE
FEDERAL FUNDING CUTS.
NOBODY REALLY KNOWS WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN RIGHT NOW THAT
IMPACTS OUR ABILITY TO TO DO A
LOT OF DIFFERENT THINGS.
SO WE'RE LOOKING FOR UNIQUE
WAYS TO ENHANCE OUR CURRENT
PROCESSES THAT WE HAVE WITHIN
OUR SOLUTIONS IN THE EVENT THAT
SOME OF THOSE FEDERAL FUNDING
CUTS HAPPEN.
AND THEN THE BIGGEST THING IS
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
HAVE CONTINUED ALIGNMENT WITH
THE CITY'S VALUES, THEIR
PRINCIPLES, THEIR CULTURE,
MAKING SURE THAT WE WE ARE
CONTINUING TO REVIEW OUR
POLICIES FROM AN EQUITY
PERSPECTIVE, FOSTERING A
CULTURE OF COLLABORATION,
INNOVATION AND JUST UPHOLDING
OUR COMMITMENT TO CREATING A
WORKPLACE WHERE ALL EMPLOYEES
FEEL VALUED, RESPECTED AND I
THINK THAT MAINTAINING THIS
ALIGNMENT IS FUNDAMENTAL TO
BUILDING TRUST, PROMOTING
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT AND
ACHIEVING OUR ORGANIZATIONAL
OBJECTIVES.
SO THERE'S SOME OF THE HORIZON
ISSUES THAT WE'RE REALLY PAYING
ATTENTION TO AND I THINK THAT'S
ALL I HAVE FOR THE GROUP
APOLOGIZE FOR MY SHORT BRIEF
AND NERVES.
I HAVEN'T DONE THIS FOR QUITE
SOME TIME SO I APPRECIATE YOUR
PATIENCE WITH ME.
>> YOU DID GREAT.
THANK FOR BEING THERE.
IF HE HADN'T SAID ANYTHING NO
ONE WOULD HAVE NOT SO GOOD JOB
AND I DON'T MEAN TO PUT YOU ON
THE SPOT WITH THIS QUESTION BUT
I'M JUST CURIOUS IF YOU HAVE
LIKE HOW FAR OFF THE MARK ARE
WE IN TERMS OF SALARIES, IN
TERMS OF COMPETITION WITH THE
PRIVATE SECTOR?
ARE WE IN THE BALLPARK OR ARE
WE IN THE CITY?
>> ARE WE HOW FAR OFF IS WHAT'S
THE DELTA SO THAT'S A REALLY
SUBJECTIVE IT DEPENDS ON THE
POSITION REALLY.
SO LIKE THE SIU DIRECTOR IN I
MEAN THAT'S SUCH A NICHE MARKET
THAT IT'S HARD TO SAY WHAT THE
DELTA IS THERE.
SAME THING WITH THE
TRANSPORTATION OR LIKE WHAT
JENNIFER WAS TALKING ABOUT WITH
HER HER HOUSING COORDINATOR
POSITION THE ECONOMIC SO IT'S
JUST HARD TO SAY I CAN'T GIVE
YOU A SOLID ANSWER ON THAT BUT
I'M HAPPY TO PROVIDE SOME
COMPARISONS ON THOSE POSITIONS
.
>> I ONLY ASK BECAUSE IT FEELS
LIKE IT'S A RECURRING THEME AND
IT FEELS LIKE IT COULD BE A
REAL THREAT TO SOME OF THE
BIGGER THINGS THAT WE WANT TO
ACCOMPLISH.
SO I THINK IT WARRANTS
OBVIOUSLY IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
ON YOUR RADAR TO PAY ATTENTION
TO BUT I THINK AS IS COUNSEL
IT'S SOMETHING WE SHOULD BE
MINDFUL OF IF WE WANT TO
CONTINUE TO FOCUS ON CUSTOMER
SERVICE THAT WE HAVE WE HAVE
THE VERY BEST TALENT AT THE
CITY WHICH I KNOW WE DO AND WE
WANT TO KEEP AT THANK YOU
ABSOLUTELY.
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION.
AND AGAIN, WE WOULD NOT HAVE
KNOWN THAT YOU DID A GREAT JOB
.
I GUESS I HAVE MORE OF A
COMMENT THAN A QUESTION BUT I
HAVE WORKED IN VARIOUS LEVELS
OF GOVERNMENT TO THIS POINT IN
MY LIFE AND ALL OF THEM HAVE
HAD SOME SORT OF PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AND HAVE ALSO
SOMEHOW HAD SOME FORM
OF EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM.
SO I'M EXCITED TO SEE, YOU
KNOW, THE PROPOSAL TO
DEVELOPMENT AND DEVELOP AND
IMPLEMENT THESE PROGRAMS JUST
BECAUSE YOU KNOW, THEY'RE NOT
NECESSARILY FLASHY OR SEXY
COMPARED TO SOME OF THE OTHER
PROPOSALS WE'VE HEARD TONIGHT.
BUT I DO THINK THEY PAY
THEMSELVES BACK OVER TIME BY
MAINTAINING AND KEEPING
EMPLOYEES ON STAFF, MAKING SURE
THEY'RE, YOU KNOW, HAPPY AND
PRODUCTIVE, YOU KNOW, ALONG
WITH PAY RATES LIKE COUNCIL
MEMBER CORNELL BROUGHT UP,
MAINTAINING EMPLOYEES FOR THE
LONG TERM REALLY DOES PAY
ITSELF BACK OVER TIME.
SO I THINK THOSE ARE REALLY
GOOD AND I WAS HAPPY TO SEE
THOSE TONIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
SO YOU HEARD FROM SIX PEOPLE
AND THERE'S PROBABLY EIGHT OR
NINE MORE THAT YOU DIDN'T HEAR
FROM.
SO WHEN YOU PUT ALL THAT
TOGETHER LIKE EVERY YEAR WE
HAVE MORE NEEDS AND MORE AND
WE HAVE REVENUE.
SO THAT'S WHERE THE BALANCING
COMES IN AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
WORKING ON NOW THE PRESENTATION
OF THE PROPOSED BUDGET WILL
HAPPEN ON APRIL TWENTY FIRST
AND SO THAT SHOULD BE YOUR DATE
ON YOUR CALENDAR WHEN YOU WOULD
START TRIGGERING BUDGET
QUESTIONS.
THE PROCESS THAT WE ASK YOU TO
FOLLOW IS TO SEND YOUR
QUESTIONS TO SARA HAPPY MARDI
KIM BUSSEL MEYER AND MYSELF.
AND AS YOU KNOW, WE CAPTURE ALL
THE QUESTIONS.
WE PROVIDE ALL THE ANSWERS AND
EVERYBODY SEES EVERYTHING
REGARDLESS OF WHO ASKED IN A
FOLLOW UP TO THE H.R. PART, WE
HOPE TO GET SOME OF OUR
INITIATIVE INFORMATION ON THE
COMPENSATION STUDY NEXT MONTH
WHICH WILL ALLOW US TO START
DEALING WITH OUR ISSUE.
YOU WILL HEAR ME SAY MORE ABOUT
THAT ON APRIL TWENTY FIRST BUT
WE RECOGNIZE IT IS A
SIGNIFICANT ISSUE TO BE ABLE TO
RETAIN TALENT TO BE ABLE TO
ATTRACT TALENT AND SO A LOT
OF DEMANDS OUT THERE FOR PEOPLE
WHO HAVE SKILLS.
ANY QUESTIONS FOR ME
?
WE CAN GO HOME NOW BUT OK,
THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
SNAPDRAGONS WE TO SEE WHAT IT'S
PROBABLY BETTER THAT WAY.
>> I'LL LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
WHAT COMES IN IN APRIL AND COME
FROM THE GREAT AND GOOD WORK WE
NOW COME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
GENERAL TIME PUBLIC COMMENT
GENERAL TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCILMAN COMMUNED
ABOUT MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL
INTEREST TO SPEAK SPEAKER
PUBLIC COMMENT GENERAL TIME TO
WORK SESSION WOULD NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE
SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES BOTH
HERE IN A LINE OF THREE MINUTES
IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU WHEN
THIRTY SECONDS ARE REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
PLEASE CONCLUDE REMARKS AND
CEDE THE FLOOR IS ANYONE WHO'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLICLY KATHY
GRISWOLD AND I BELIEVE PEOPLE
WILL BE ARRIVING ABOUT EIGHT
FORTY FIVE SO GET OUT OF HERE
BEFORE THEN ALSO PEOPLE WOULD
BE ABLE TO GO HOME AND I
WOULDN'T BE UP HERE IF
PEDESTRIANS DIDN'T DIE ON OUR
STREETS.
CAME ACROSS THE ARTICLE TODAY
FROM TWENTY FIFTEEN WHEN WE
PASSED A RESOLUTION WITH A GOAL
OF ZERO DEATHS BY TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE.
HOWEVER WE'VE ALREADY HAD ONE
DEATH THIS YEAR AND IT WAS AT
AN AREA THAT WE TALKED ABOUT WE
KNEW IT WAS A PROBLEM AREA BUT
WE DIDN'T TAKE ANY ACTION.
I DO WANT TO THANK THE TWO
COUNCIL MEMBERS WHO ACTUALLY
WENT OUT THERE AND MET WITH AN
ENGINEER.
A PRIVATE ENGINEER LOOKED AT
THE CRASH SITE AND HAVE
IDENTIFIED SOME IMPROVEMENTS
AND I HOPE THOSE IMPROVEMENT
AND IMPROVEMENTS AT OTHER CRASH
SITES WILL BE FUNDED THIS YEAR
.
I DIDN'T HEAR ANYTHING
MENTIONED ABOUT IMPROVING
ILLUMINATOR AT OUR CROSSWALKS
AND I KNOW THAT IS ONE OF THE
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS TO SOME
OF THESE CRASHES.
THERE WAS A MENTION OF THEIR
RETRO REFLECTIVITY LEVEL ON OUR
SITE AND I DID HEAR A FEW YEARS
AGO FROM A MICHIGAN STATE
TRAFFIC ENGINEER THAT THE
REFLECTIVITY WAS A LITTLE TOO
HIGH ON OUR SIDE AND WE USUALLY
CREATE THEM OURSELVES AND SO WE
NEED TO BE COGNIZANT OF THAT.
>> THE OTHER ISSUE I DON'T KNOW
HOW TO RESTATE IT SO IT'S
UNDERSTANDABLE BUT WHEN PEOPLE
HAVE A COMPLEX PROBLEM TO
ADDRESS, THEY HAVE A TENDENCY
TO OVERSIMPLIFY THE PROBLEM
DEFINITION AND THEN THEY GO OUT
AND SOLVE THE SIMPLIFIED
PROBLEM WHICH REALLY DOESN'T
SOLVE THE REAL PROBLEM.
THAT'S WHAT I BELIEVE HAPPENED
WITH THE ROAD TO A CYCLE TRACK.
I CAREFULLY LOOKED AT THE VIDEO
AND THE DOCUMENTATION THE TWO
WAY CYCLE TRACK DESCRIPTION
DOES NOT MENTION THE DRIVEWAY'S
THE RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS.
THOSE ARE CRITICAL TO THE
DESIGN OF THE STREET AND IT
BRINGS ME BACK TO ONE OF MY OLD
TOPICS WHICH IS SITE DIST..
AND WHILE ENGINEERS HAVE THE
AUTHORITY TO MAKE MOST
DECISIONS THEY CANNOT IGNORE
FEDERAL STANDARDS FOR SITE
DISTANCE AND WHY WE HAVE
CONTINUED TO DO THAT IS BEYOND
ME.
SO ANYWAY, I'M NOT GOING TO GO
AWAY AND I AM ALSO GOING TO
APPEAL THIS TO THE HIGHEST
LEVELS POSSIBLE BECAUSE THE
WOMAN WHO WAS KILLED WAS A
FRIEND OF A FRIEND AND THIS HAS
TO STOP AND WE HAVE TO DO OUR
DESIGNS INCORPORATING SITE
DISTANCE.
SO I HOPE WE WILL SO THAT WE
CAN GET A CHANGE ORDER IN AND
NOT DELAY THIS PROJECT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC COMMENT
PART OF YES.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO BE ABLE TO COME?
IS THERE ANYONE IN LINE WOULD
LIKE TO BE ABLE TO COME MAY I
ONLY HAVE ONE CALLER?
IT DOESN'T LOOK LIKE HE HAS HIS
HAND UP SEE KNOWN PUBLIC
COMMENT AS CLOSE OF A MOTION TO
ADJOURN ARE ARE THERE
COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNCIL
COUNCILOR BRITISH YES.
SO CYNTHIA AND I WANTED TO OUR
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON AND I
WANTED TO SAY THAT WE WILL BE
HAVING A COFFEE HOUR ON APRIL
14TH AT YES.
AT THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY AND WE
HOPE YOU ALL COME AND MISS
JENNIFER HALL WILL BE THERE TO
TALK.
>> YES, SHE WILL BE OUR SPECIAL
GUEST TO TALK ABOUT ALL THE
AMAZING THINGS THAT ARE GOING
ON WITH THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
VILLAGE.
THANK YOU FOR THE COMMUNICATION
MOST JOURNALISM BY NOW LOTS
OF DISCUSSION ON POST.
WE'RE ADJOURNED